Good evening, class. We will continue the lectures on kinematics of robot manipulators. Let us review the concept first before we move on to today's lecture on inverse kinematics.

Recall that we have learned how to model the forward kinematics of a robot system, so that we have a homogeneous transformation matrix that gives us the position and orientation of the end effector with respect to the base frame. For position, it is the x, y, z of the end effector with respect to the base frame. This is basically a three-dimensional vector, which means that you can just put it into a vector form to represent the tool configuration vector for solving the inverse kinematics problem. However, the orientation matrix, which is the rotation transformation of the mobile frame with respect to the base frame, is a three by three matrix, and it can be partitioned into three columns, with the physical meaning represented in this diagram. R3, the last column, represents the approach vector. R2 represents the sliding vector, that means the opening and closing direction of your gripper. And R1 is basically perpendicular to R2 and R3 according to the right-hand rule.

Therefore, we can see from here that if we take the approach vector, it represents part of the orientation, in the sense that you can make the approach to an object so as to pick it up, and it is three-dimensional. This means that if you put it into a vector form, it represents the orientation, but something is missing, because in order to pick up the object, not only must you approach the object, but you must also be able to align the gripper. Align the gripper, that means that you need to control this sliding vector so that it will align with the flat surface. For example, if you have an object here, the gripper needs to align with the flat surface so as to pick it up. Which basically means that we need to be able to rotate R2. To rotate R2, basically we can use this roll angle of the end effector, so that we have position, approach, and the roll.

But if you put them together, it is still not a minimum representation, because in three-dimensional space we have six degrees of freedom, three for position (translation), and three for orientation (rotation with respect to x, y, z). The tool configuration method is just to compact this roll angle into a three-dimensional space, by observing the idea that if you have a vector and you multiply by a positive scalar, it does not change the direction of the vector. Therefore, we put an exponential function, because an exponential function is always positive regardless of whether Qn is positive or negative. This will enable us to encode this Qn into the magnitude of this orientation vector. This was the idea that we went through in the last lecture.

Now, the purpose of putting it into a tool configuration form is actually to derive the forward kinematics model as a six-dimensional vector, so as to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Suppose that we put it into a tool configuration form. Then we can specify the position of the object. For example, if this object is located at a certain position, then we can try to find out what the joint angles or joint configuration of this robot will be in order to pick up this object and grasp it with a certain orientation. That means that you need to find the solution of this forward kinematics equation. What is the Q, so that given x, you will be able to find Q?

As you can see, forward kinematics is the other way round. It says that, given Q, given the joint angle, you have this model to calculate the position and the orientation of the end effector. But in a robot task, what we want is the reverse, because a robot is a low-level machine. We need to tell the robot exactly what joint angle one is, what joint two, three, and so on are, so that it will be able to pick up this object. Which means that we need to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Therefore, the purpose of deriving the forward kinematics equation is actually to solve the inverse kinematics problem, so that given any task, and here you can see that x is your task, given the position of the object that you want to pick up, given the orientation with which you wish the manipulator to pick up the object. That means, what is the direction you want to approach it, vertically downward, or should it be approached at a certain direction, and what would be the rotational angle, or what would be the sliding vector, so as to accomplish the task? In this case, it involves finding the joint configuration by solving the inverse kinematics problem. That is just a review of all the concepts that we have learned so far.

Last week, at the end of the lecture, I went through this example in a hurry, and I did not finish it. Today, I am going to repeat it again and complete this example before we move on to the last example. Here in Example 3.1, we have a robot with only five motors, five degrees of freedom. That means that you cannot realize certain orientations, because in order to realize any orientation and any position, you need to have at least six motors, six degrees of freedom. Suppose that you have less than that. Then in some cases, you may not be able to realize the orientation. But you can plan your work cell properly, as we will see in some examples later on.

Here, we will start by expressing the forward kinematics model that we have obtained in homogeneous transformation matrix form into a six-dimensional vector. As you can see from here, the position is straightforward. You just put it as the first three elements of your tool configuration vector, because position itself is three-dimensional. But orientation consists of three vectors, R1, R2, and R3. Therefore, two-thirds of the information is redundant, because the minimum representation of orientation is also three-dimensional. One way is that we take out the approach vector only. If you take out the approach vector, and then you put it into the tool configuration form together with your position vector, it will be a six-dimensional vector. However, this vector does not give you the rotation, the sliding direction. In order to achieve that, we encode it as the magnitude of the approach vector. We use a positive function of Qn, an exponential function, so that you will not change the approach direction, and the magnitude will give you basically the Qn. This is just one way to give the minimum representation of the orientation.

The purpose of expressing this forward kinematics equation into this form is actually to solve the inverse kinematics problem, which means that now you can start to relate it to Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4, Q5, Q6, six of them. Here, we say that given a desired position and orientation, that means given the task, what are the joint angles, joint angle one, two, three, four, five in this case, so that you can accomplish this task? I say again, given the desired position, where the object is located, given the desired orientation, how you want to pick up the object, or how you want to place the object, what are the joint angles, Q1 to Q5, in this case only five degrees of freedom, to accomplish this task? Notice that this can change quite frequently, because your task at one time is at this location, and another time you may want to pick up something at another location. You need something very fast to calculate this inverse kinematics, that means an analytic form. Given any position, any orientation, I can quickly calculate the corresponding joint angles to achieve this task.

The solving of the inverse kinematics problem is not so systematic. Unlike forward kinematics, which, even though it is quite tedious, is systematic: you assign coordinates according to the DH algorithm, then you identify the four kinematic parameters, then you use the kinematic parameters to find the transformation matrices and multiply them together. But for inverse kinematics, there is no systematic way, no fixed rule. The only thing we know is that the forward kinematics model of a robot manipulator is usually made of trigonometric functions, sine and cosine. As you can see, there are many terms consisting of sine and cosine, which means that you need to apply trigonometry to solve the inverse kinematics problem.

Typically, I will say that you just watch out for a few things. Firstly, sometimes you can combine the equations by dividing sine by cosine to form tangent. Also, sometimes you can square the cosine and square the sine and add them to simplify: cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one. Typically it is these two. Of course, you also have to remember how to expand cosine of x plus or minus y, and sine of x plus or minus y. This is something everybody learned before university. You just have to revise all these trigonometric formulas and then apply them to your inverse kinematics problem by looking at the equation carefully. You start by observing the equations carefully. As I said, the objective is to find the joint configuration given any position of the object and the corresponding orientation to pick it up.

Now, let us look at these six equations carefully, starting from the first two. For the first two equations, even though they look very complex, if you observe them carefully, everything in the bracket is the same. The difference is that at the extreme left, the first has cosine and the second equation has sine. Therefore, if you divide these two equations, sine over cosine, because this will give you tangent, if you divide equation two by equation one, you can cancel the common terms. As a result, you get only sine of Q1 divided by cosine of Q1, which means that you get tangent of Q1. This basically means that Q1 is arctangent of B2 over B1. This is the first inverse kinematics equation. Given B2 and B1, what is Q1? B1 and B2 are actually the x and y desired position. That means that given the location of the object on the x axis and y axis, you can first calculate the rotational angle joint one.

In solving the inverse kinematics problem, one thing that you have to bear in mind is that eventually you will write this algorithm in a program, to let the user use it. After you solve it on paper, we need to program it in the robot controller program. In this case, you will know that suppose you run the program, when you execute this command, subsequently Q1 is already calculated. Which means that now, after this equation, Q1 is a known joint angle. Which means that you need to take advantage of this known joint angle to proceed to calculate the other angles. In this case, it will be Q3, Q4, Q5.

Next, we will proceed to first solve for Q3 plus Q4. The reason is this. If we look at the last three equations now, and we notice that Q1 is already known, the only unknown is the sine and cosine of Q3 plus Q4. Which means that it may be possible to isolate Q3 plus Q4 first, because Q1 is already known. In these three equations, you can see that the first two equations are in terms of sine of Q2 plus Q3 plus Q4, one with cosine Q1, the other one with sine Q1, while the last equation is cosine of Q2 plus Q3 plus Q4. If you look at these equations, you can see that because the first two are different by sine and cosine, maybe I can multiply the first by cosine Q1 on both sides. This will give you a cosine squared Q1. Equation two can be multiplied by sine Q1, and that will give me sine squared Q1. Why do I do this? Remember, cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one. As a result, if you add up these two equations, you will get only this term with this term, because sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one. This basically means that if I multiply the fourth equation by C1 on both sides, and I multiply the fifth equation by S1 on both sides, because of the fact that cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one, I will get only sine of Q2 plus Q3 plus Q4.

Next, if you compare this equation with this one, the only difference is that one is sine and one is cosine. Which means that you should use the other property: sine divided by cosine gives you tangent. Next, I will invert the sign first, that means that you multiply both sides by negative, then you divide by the last equation, equation six. Also invert the sign first. The purpose, you can see, is to cancel Q5. You cancel Q5, so that you can get tangent of Q3 plus Q4. Notice that everything on this side is already known, because Q1 you have solved with the first inverse kinematics equation over here. When you reach this stage, this is already known. If it is already known, then you can actually calculate Q3 plus Q4 by taking the arctangent of this. Q3 plus Q4 will be the arctangent of this, and because Q1 is known, you can calculate sine Q1 and cosine Q1. B4, B5, B6 are user input. Given B4, B5, B6, calculate Q3 plus Q4. This is the next inverse kinematics equation. Given B4, B5, B6, calculate Q3 plus Q4 together. But we do not know what Q3 is, what Q4 is; we only know the sum of them at this stage. We need to proceed further to solve for the remaining variables.

At this stage, it is good to take a look at the equations and identify what the known parameters are now and what the unknown parameters are. Here, I underline all the known parameters in blue. Because Q1 is known, Q3 plus Q4 is known, therefore the sine and cosine of Q3 plus Q4 are all known, that means they can be calculated. So sine Q1 is also known. Similarly, over here, these are all the known parameters. D1, D, and A are the kinematic parameters; they are also known. That means that here I would be able to focus on these three equations. The idea is that I want to express the unknown terms in terms of the known terms. This is the main idea.

Let us start from the first two equations. Again, you can notice that they are just different by sine and cosine. This basically means that if I multiply the first equation by cosine Q1, and then multiply the second equation by sine Q1, again I will be able to get cosine squared and sine squared. The purpose is that I can then add them up and use cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one to combine these two equations into just one equation. How does it look? Here it will look like this. You multiply the first equation by C1, the second equation by S1, and then you add them up. Cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one, then you can combine them into one equation. After that, I will move this known term, these are all known terms, to the other side of the equation. I can get this equation over here. The left-hand side will be all the joint angles which are unknown at this stage. The right-hand side are those terms that can be calculated by the previous inverse kinematics equation. Next, similarly, I can also move all the known terms to the other side of the equation, and then invert the sign. I can get the next equation. Again, all the known terms are moved to the right-hand side. The left-hand side are all the unknown terms. Let us call this B1, let us call this B2. In your program, normally you need to define variables to calculate that; in this case, I can calculate all these terms called B1, B2, B3 by using Q3 plus Q4 and all the kinematic parameters and all the user inputs. Next, this basically explains these two equations. By the way, I have uploaded this on NTU Learn, because some students say that they want to look at it, but actually you can just go to the video and capture a screenshot if you want.

Basically, this gives you two equations, equation A and equation B, and B1 and B2 are known. That means when you write the program, you have this statement now: B1, B2 can be calculated based on all this. Next, we look at equation A and equation B. Then we observe that one is cosine, the other one is sine. They are only different by sine and cosine. This basically means that maybe I can try to take the square of the equation. If you square one equation, you will get cosine squared; if you square the other equation, you will get sine squared. Again, sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one. Then you may be able to simplify some of the terms inside. Actually, this involves a lot of experience and trial and error. After some time, we will see some similarity in some of the kinematic equations naturally.

I say again, we square it because equation A consists of cosine and equation B consists of sine. I should square them so that when I add them up, sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one, and I can simplify a lot of the terms. This is the square of the first equation, this is the square of the second equation, and here we can see that this sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one. Which means that if I add up the two equations, then I will be able to get something like this. Because cosine squared Q2 plus sine squared Q2 is equal to one, therefore the first two terms over here add up to be this. These two terms add up to be this. In the last two terms, there is a common term, you can take it out. The remaining term will be cosine Q2 times cosine of Q2 plus Q3, plus sine Q2 times sine of Q2 plus Q3.

At one glance, it looks like it becomes quite complicated. But when you see this kind of equation, cosine cosine plus sine sine, it should remind you of a very familiar formula, and here there is a plus, meaning that it should be cosine of x minus y. Then the rest is very simple. Either of them can be sine or cosine. This means cosine of Q2, and this means cosine of Q2 plus Q3. Either of them can be x or y. It depends on which one you want to call x, which one you want to call y. Similarly here, you have sine Q2 and then sine of Q2 plus Q3. Which basically means that if you call this x and this y, then you will get Q2 minus (Q2 plus Q3), which is negative Q3. Cosine of negative Q3 is still cosine Q3. This is a property of cosine. Now, you may also define it the other way, calling y as x, no difference, and in this case it will be plus or minus. So you get Q3 directly. In either case, this thing is simplified to Q3, which basically isolates Q3.

Which basically explains the last equation on this slide, on the left. That means that by squaring equation A and B and adding them up and making use of sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one, I can then get one equation with cosine Q3. Next, if I move this to this side of the equation and then divide by 2*A2*A3, I get cosine Q3. Which explains this last equation: cosine Q3 will be equal to B1 squared plus B2 squared minus A2 squared minus A3 squared, divided by 2*A2*A3, and then take arccosine. This is just rearranging this equation to get cosine Q3 and then take arccosine. When you take arccosine, be careful; just now I said that whether it is negative Q3 or positive Q3, both give you cosine Q3. Which means that there are actually two solutions when you take arccosine: one will be positive, one will be negative. This is an example to let you know that the solution of inverse kinematics is not unique. Sometimes you have multiple solutions. What you need to do is just to choose one of them and then proceed.

This basically gives us Q3. Always mark down what is known: Q1 is known, Q3 plus Q4 is known, and now Q3 is also calculated from this inverse kinematics equation. Which means that we can now proceed to look at the equations again, equation A and B. We know that Q3 is known. However, we do not know cosine of Q2 plus Q3. Even though Q3 is known, we do not know what cosine of Q2 plus Q3 is, and we do not know what Q2 is. We have a problem, because this, which is known, is inside the two terms. This term is sine of Q2 plus Q3, which is known, but it is inside this term. In order to isolate it, you can expand it, because we know that cosine of Q2 plus Q3 is equal to cosine Q2 cosine Q3 minus sine Q2 sine Q3. Similarly, sine of Q2 plus Q3 is equal to sine Q2 cosine Q3 plus cosine Q2 sine Q3. That means that I can expand it. This explains this equation here. You just expand them.

The purpose is that after you expand them, then you can isolate the sine and cosine. Before expanding, the term is inside, and you cannot calculate anything, even though you know Q3. After you expand them, you can see that you can calculate cosine Q3, you can calculate sine Q3. This basically means that everything that I underline in red in this equation, which is a result of expanding from this equation, is known. This is known, this is known, and this is not known, this is also not known. Similarly, these are not known. However, notice that you have two unknowns, C2 and S2, and you have two equations. If you have two unknowns and two equations, you can solve it. After solving this, this is what you get.

Do not be confused by these two equations. It is something everybody knows, because it is something like B1 is equal to K1*x minus K2*y. This is my K1, this is my x, this is basically K2, and I call this y. Then similarly, you have another equation, B2 is equal to the same coefficients, K1*y plus K2*x. Everybody can solve for x and y if you put it into this form. If you can solve this linear equation, definitely you can solve these two. This will be your x, and this will be your y, where you solve it in terms of K1 and K2, which are known, because you have expanded sine and cosine of Q2 plus Q3, so everything which I underline here is known. That means K1 and K2 are known, B1, B2 also known. The only unknowns are x and y, which can be obtained by solving two equations with two unknowns.

After you obtain these two equations, you need to combine them together, because sine and cosine alone do not give you the quadrant information. That means if you solve this one alone, and if you solve this one alone, because sine and cosine may have the same solution for the same x, for example. This basically means that you should not use only one of them. The idea is that we combine them. How do we combine them? You do sine Q2 divided by cosine Q2, that means this divided by this. And the denominator is the same, so you cancel out. This explains the last equation, because sine divided by cosine gives you tangent. Tangent of Q2. Then you take the arctangent to get Q2.

Let us recall or track what is known at this stage. Q1 is calculated, Q3 plus Q4 is calculated, Q3 is calculated, Q2 is also calculated. Now, you need not solve for more, because you have Q3 plus Q4, so it is just Q3 plus Q4 minus Q3, and you can get Q4. This is the next equation. Which means that we have solved Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4. Now, the only unknown is Q5. Q5, the last angle, the roll angle, is very easy to solve, because we know that Q5 is included in the magnitude of the approach vector.

The approach vector, remember, is a unit vector. That means that the magnitude is always equal to one, representing the mobile frame. If you look at the last three components, B4, B5, B6, if you square B4, B5, B6 and add them, this means the square of the magnitude of the three-dimensional vector. Then, because sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one, it is quite easy to see. You square these two, add, and then C1 squared plus S1 squared is equal to one. You get sine squared of Q2 plus Q3 plus Q4. Then after that, you square this one, you add another time. All these will be squared also, and everything combines into one, that means e to the power of something. Which basically means that the magnitude of your orientation vector actually contains the roll angle. And this is R3. The magnitude of R3, that means this square root, is always equal to one. Next, we take the square root of this term, then invert this equation, and you get Q5. This is the last inverse kinematics equation. It is quite standard, always in this form, because it is e to the power of Qn divided by pi that is the magnitude of the orientation vector.

This is basically an example of the inverse kinematics problem. And as I said, there is no systematic way to solve this. It has to be based on observation and the application of mathematics, in particular trigonometry, to solve the inverse kinematics problem. But after you solve it for a while, you can see some similarity in some of the equations. For example, if you have gone through this example, and if you go through the last example of inverse kinematics, you will see something very similar.

This is the tool configuration vector of the four-axis SCARA robot. That means that it has only four joints: Q1, Q2 revolute, D3 prismatic (I can extend up and down), and this is the roll angle. Q4 is the roll angle. Because it has only four degrees of freedom, notice that you cannot specify some orientations. It has to be fixed at zero, because we have only four degrees of freedom. Only B6, that means Q4, can be controlled. For orientation, you can only rotate Q4, nothing else, to rotate your end effector. This is the limitation. Which means that when you design your work cell, you must place the part properly so that it can be picked up. If you do not place it properly, you cannot pick up some parts at some orientations.

This is the forward kinematics equation in tool configuration form. The first three are the position, and the last three represent the orientation, the approach vector multiplied by the roll angle encoded in the exponential function. For this robot, remember, it is always pointing vertically downward. The approach vector was (0, 0, negative one). You can refer to the previous example.

This is basically the tool configuration vector, and we start by looking at equation one and equation two. It is very similar to the previous example. Remember the one with A1, A2, or B1, B2, B3. Very similar, except that here, minus one minus two means cosine of Q1 minus Q2, and S12 is sine of Q1 minus Q2. Other than that, it is exactly the same. That means that the first equation consists of cosine, the second equation consists of sine. That basically means that I should again try this: if I square the first equation, I will get cosine squared; if I square the second equation, I will get sine squared. Because if you square them and add them, using cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one, some of the terms can be simplified. The coupling term then will be added up into cosine cosine plus sine sine. Again, this should remind you of the formula cosine cosine plus sine sine. You can put any sequence: if you want to call this Q1, and call this minus (Q1 minus Q2), then it will be x minus y. x minus y will be minus the bracket Q2, minus the bracket minus Q2, and it will give you Q2. Even if you subtract the other way round, you get negative Q2, never mind, cosine of negative Q2 is still cosine Q2. Which basically means that this term can be further simplified into cosine Q2 only. That basically isolates Q2. We have an equation with Q1 and Q2, we square them and simplify them using trigonometric formulas, then we can get Q2.

Next, if you move this to the other side of the equation, the kinematic parameters, and then divide by two, you can get cosine Q2, and then you take arccosine. This explains the system over here: arccosine of this summation minus A1 squared minus A2 squared, and then divided by 2*A1*A2, gives you the first inverse kinematics equation. As I said, once you get the first equation, take note, Q2 can be calculated given B1, B2, and the kinematic parameters, which are known. We have Q2 now. Go back to your equations, and then make a remark that Q2 is known.

If you look at the equation, Q2, even though it is known, is coupled inside these two terms, which are sine and cosine of Q1 minus Q2. Again, we should expand them, because this is cosine of Q1 minus Q2, and this is sine of Q1 minus Q2. You can get this cosine cosine plus sine sine for cosine of x minus y. Which means, expand these two. Why do you expand them? Because Q2 is known. If Q2 is known and you expand them, you can calculate all the terms relating to Q2. If it is coupled inside, you cannot calculate, because you do not know what Q1 is. So we expand it into this term.

After that, look at this equation again. It is something that we have discussed just now. These are just two equations with two unknowns, because Q2 is known. Therefore, this is known, this is also known, these are also known. B1, B2 are user input, which are available as input to the program. This means that the two equations are again just two equations with two unknowns, something like K1*x plus K2*y is equal to B1. This is K1, this is K2, this is x, this is y. Similarly, on the other hand, you have negative K2*x plus K1*y is equal to B2. Then it basically gives you x and y by solving these two equations with two unknowns. This explains how we get this. Just solve these two linear equations. Equation one, equation two, you must know which one is known, which is not known. Then you can solve for the unknown in terms of the known coefficients. Finally, you will get x and y, which are the two terms, the sine and cosine. Again, when you have sine and cosine, you divide sine by cosine, which gives you tangent. Then take the arctangent and cancel out some of the common terms after division. You will get the inverse kinematics equation, which is to calculate Q1. Here, Q1 is now known, because it can be calculated given B1, B2, and we already know Q2 from the first inverse kinematics equation. Therefore, we isolate it and then solve the two equations with two unknowns. We get Q1 and Q2.

Q3 is very easy to solve, because in this equation there is only one unknown. This is user input, these are kinematic parameters. Which means that you just rearrange the equation, that means that Q3 is basically equal to D1 minus D4 minus B3. Just rearrange the equation, or you move this to this side and put a negative sign, and it will give you the inverse kinematics equation. This equation is quite easy to understand: it says that Q3 can be calculated from D1, D4, and given B3. What is B3? Remember, your tool configuration vector, B1 is x, B2 is y, B3 is z. That means the desired position of the object that you want the robot to pick up, the desired position for the robot to perform the task. Given the desired z, you can go back to the example. I have also uploaded this slide in case you want it; you can find it in the additional materials. I just copy basically the DH diagram to relate to this example.

Basically, this is very easy to interpret. B3 is this, that means, where is the desired position for your end effector along the z axis? Maybe you want it to be 0.5 units above the ground. Then given this, when the user inputs this, you will go to your program, and your program then will reach this inverse kinematics equation. Remember, this is D1 and this is D4. You can see it is actually very easy to interpret: D1 minus D4, then minus this one will give you this one, because Q3 plus D4 plus B3 is equal to D1. Therefore, if you want to calculate what this extension is, that means, remember Q3 is a prismatic joint, here you want to calculate what the appropriate extension should be so that your end effector can reach for that position. This is what inverse kinematics is about: given the task, find the joint parameters. In this case, this is the extension, a prismatic joint where you can extend it up and down, so as to obtain the desired length for reaching the object.

As for the last one, because B4, B5 equal to zero, when you square them, you only get B6 squared. That means that basically you just square the last one, that is enough. Then you can solve for Q4. B4, B5 is equal to zero. This is a simple equation eventually.

Basically, we have discussed forward kinematics modeling, and then we put it into a tool configuration form, and we have discussed how to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Forward kinematics modeling is tedious but systematic; the inverse kinematics problem is actually not systematic. Therefore, it requires some mathematics background in trigonometry, as well as careful observation of the equations.

And the next topic I am going to discuss is related to path planning. The last example in this chapter is about how to plan your task and how to specify the task.

In the assignment, remember the first step. The first step is that you assign your base frame, making sure that the z axis is aligned with the rotational axis of joint one. x and y are up to you to assign. Now, this base frame plays a very important role in robotics, because that is the reference frame of your robot. Which means that where the part is located is always with respect to the base frame. That means that if you want the robot to pick up the part, you must tell the robot where it is located with respect to its base.

Actually, path planning is just to specify the position and orientation using the base frame. If you understand that concept, it is very easy. I say again, path planning is just to specify the position and orientation of your task with respect to your reference frame, which is your base. Where do you get the base frame? From the DH assignment, the first step. This reference frame is very important. Now, if you just purchase a robot to use, the user manual will define where this x, y, z is and how it is defined. Then all your tasks you must define with respect to this reference frame. Otherwise, you cannot command the robot to reach for this position, because all the inverse kinematics problems inside the program refer to this reference frame. So you must plan it in this way so that the algorithm will work to pick it up.

As I said, our objective is to explain it from a robotics engineer's point of view. That means that you join some startup company and make some new robots; this is the necessary knowledge. For programming, operators can also program. After you buy a robot, the company will provide some training. It is not that difficult, actually. Once you have some programming experience, you will be able to do it for the others similarly.

The next thing that I am going to discuss is related to task planning. Here, we use a simple robotic work cell example with a camera. Industrial robots do not come with cameras. Suppose that you want to use vision, you must integrate it with a camera system and also assign coordinates to your camera. The camera is very easy to assign the coordinate to, because a camera will take a picture. A picture is 2D, so you have x, y. This explains this x and y, which define the position in the image space. And the depth of the camera, that means that if you have a camera, the depth refers to the distance from the camera to the object. This is how we define the coordinates of the camera. As for the robot, you need to use the DH algorithm. If you just purchase a robot, this is from the user manual. As for the part, it is up to you. You just assign something, for example similar to the base, to the part. Then you can now find out the relationship between all these coordinates, in order to issue commands to the robot, using the camera to observe the part.

I want to use the camera to observe the part, and then I want to issue commands to the robot. A robot can only understand the base frame. It cannot understand the camera frame. What you need to do is to relate all this to the base frame. By doing so, then you can obtain the location of the part. Here we are given two matrices, but actually, this is the matrix that you need to figure out. Here I will explain how we arrive at these two matrices. The first matrix is the part with respect to the camera, that means your camera is your reference; you use the camera to look at the part. And the second one, you use the camera to look at the base. So: part with respect to camera, base with respect to camera.

Now, how do we get all this information? Firstly, this is actually very easy. Where is the location of the part with respect to the camera? That means that you know the location of the camera, and you need to do some measurements. Where is the location of the part along z? If it is 19 units, put 19 units. That means that it is at 19 units below your camera. And the x axis is this one. All these are just examples; it depends on where the parts are located. This is just an example where x is equal to zero, that means that they are aligned, no displacement along x. For y, there is a slight offset of five units, and positive y is here, so the other side will be negative five. So this is how we figure it out, that means we basically physically look at the task and identify the location with respect to this.

Now, this basically means that if your camera can locate the parts... the other way is that you have an RGBD camera, so you can automatically sense the depth. So that gives you this one. Remember that you have the image point, x and y. Using some camera calibration, which you will learn in the next part of the lectures, you can also relate your pixels to the physical coordinates x, y. It is basically just some scaling in this setup. When you take a picture, it is basically scaled. If you know the scaling, you can restore the physical coordinates as well. That is camera calibration. After that, we get this.

I will explain this one, the same thing. It means, where is the location of the base with respect to the camera? You can also similarly use the camera to sense the location of the base. The camera detects the location of the base. So this is basically the two.

Next, I will explain this first matrix. There are three columns. The three columns define the orientation of your part with respect to your camera frame. Remember that your camera will be the reference now. If you look at this, this will be x, y, and z. Therefore, we are looking at the location of the axes of the part with respect to your camera coordinates. Your x axis is horizontal, pointing to your right. You must look at this camera, and then you will see something parallel. What is y? y is (0, 1, 0), a unit vector. The x axis is (1, 0, 0), y is (0, 1, 0), z is (0, 0, 1). This basically means that your x here should be the negative of y. That means that I am actually just expressing the vector x of the part using my camera reference. This is the first one.

Let us move on to the second one, which is now y. You look at y; it is here, parallel to x. What is x? (1, 0, 0). This is negative, the other way around. You see this, negative (1, 0, 0). That means that my y axis of the part, expressed in camera coordinates, is negative (1, 0, 0). If you understand that, then you move on to the last one, which will be easier. This is z. You want to express it with respect to the camera frame. You notice that this is (0, 0, 1), which is downward, and this one is upward. Again, you have negative (0, 0, 1), which gives you (0, 0, negative one). In other words, I am just putting all these vectors x, y, z with respect to my camera coordinates. So I get the orientation and position of the part with respect to the camera. That means we assume the camera can detect this part.

Next, similarly, you can do it for the base with respect to the camera. No need to repeat it, because if you look at the two, they are the same; the rotation part is the same. We just reproduce it. As for the location, obviously they are at different locations. This is fixed: the location of your base with respect to your fixed camera is always fixed, while this one can change. The x, y, z of the part can be anywhere inside the workspace; it is always changing. The camera should always detect it.

Then after that, given these two transformation matrices, we can then proceed to find where the part is located with respect to the base. That means that you use the camera to automatically locate it, but you need to use transformation to transform from camera coordinates into the base coordinates. This is the idea.

Here, let us look at this configuration again. Suppose that your camera can detect the part. This means that I can get the location of the part with respect to the camera. Now, suppose that your camera can also detect the base. This basically means that you can get the base with respect to the camera. But when you want to find the part with respect to the base, what you need is not the base with respect to the camera. What you need is the other way round, the camera with respect to the base. Because when you multiply these two together, you get the location of the part with respect to the base. It is very easy to understand. This is the part with respect to the camera; the camera is an intermediate point. Then you must also know where the camera is located with respect to the base. Then you multiply them together, you get a composite transformation matrix, which gives you the part with respect to the base.

But remember, just now we did not get this transformation matrix directly. What we get is the other way around, the location of the base with respect to the camera, because you use the camera to locate the parts as well as the base. In this case, it is okay. Remember the inverse transformation matrix. Just take the inverse transformation matrix. You can also get this, and you do not need to find the determinant, because there is a very simple property to do so. And by doing so, you can check that you will get this matrix.

This matrix basically means that your part is located at this location with respect to the base. Which basically means that the part is located at x equal to 30 units, y equal to 15 units, and there is a depth of one unit. That means the height of this object is one unit, so that we can identify the top surface, the center of the top surface of the part, and then command the robot to pick it up. So basically, we identify the location by using the camera, then we take the inverse transformation to get the other way round, to get the camera with respect to the base. Then we can get the location of the parts using camera sensing.

Position is not enough in order to pick up this part. You must make sure that, for example, you grip at the flat surface. Here, it says that you must grasp it by the front and the back flat surfaces, which means that in this case you want to plan it this way, because this is a specification. That means that you have a part, and this question asks you to grab it this way. If there is no such specification, you may also grab it this way, no problem. But this question specifically says to do it this way, so you need to follow this example.

Firstly, the approach, in this case, is unique. That means that if you want to pick up this part, you must approach it downwards, so as to pick up this part. But here, you can see that your gripper must align this way so that it is aligned with the front and the back. This basically means that your R2 must be specified in a certain way. Now, how do we specify this approach and sliding? Remember, it must be with respect to your reference frame. x is (1, 0, 0), y is (0, 1, 0), z is (0, 0, 1). Then your approach vector, if you want it to be vertically downward, then you refer to your reference frame. It is the other way round of your z, which is defined from the algorithm's first step. That means that it should be negative (0, 0, 1), which is (0, 0, negative one). Here you have a vector, (0, 0, negative one). Transpose means that a column becomes a row. Usually there is this notation, I3. I3 is a unit vector, (0, 0, 1). I2 is (0, 1, 0), that means x, y, z, plus I1, I2, I3.

And the question says that you must align your gripper this way. So this means your sliding direction, which is your R2 now, must be parallel to your y axis. And it can be both ways: it can be this way or the other way. It is quite easy to understand; you rotate this 180 degrees. It makes no difference. When you rotate your gripper 180 degrees, it makes no difference; either this way or that way is the same. It is not unique, but you just choose one. This explains why there is a plus or minus sign, because it can be either way. If you choose this way, then it will be (0, negative one, 0). If you choose the other way, then it will be positive (0, 1, 0). Both are fine.

But after you have fixed your approach and sliding, the other one is fixed. It comes up naturally from the right-hand rule or the cross product. If you take the cross product, mathematically it is R2 cross R3 in this order, and you will get R1. Or you can sketch it in this coordinate and use your right-hand rule to determine R1. Here I sketch a configuration with R2 equal to (0, negative one, 0), which will give you R1 as positive (1, 0, 0). This one, by the way, remember, is (1, 0, 0); x is always (1, 0, 0). And this is what it means: you approach it vertically downward, then for your sliding direction you choose one of them. If you choose (0, negative one, 0), then that will be your sliding direction here. Finally, if you choose this as negative one, the other one will be (1, 0, 0), according to the right-hand rule. Suppose that you choose the other way round, if you choose positive here, then you will be negative here, depending on which one you choose. Either one is correct. You need not put the general one; just choose one of them, such as this.

This is the orientation to pick up the part. From there, then you can fit it to the inverse kinematics algorithm, given B1, B2 equal to 15, B3 equal to one. Solve the inverse kinematics problem to get the joint angles, as well as, given the orientation, the rotational joint angles. We can then solve all this inverse kinematics problem. This is just a rough idea of what we are going to discuss right after the break. We will take a break here. Please come back as usual, 15 minutes later. Then we will continue on the path planning part.

Welcome back. This slide is basically to summarize the concept that we have learned so far, and to also link them: forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, and trajectory planning. Firstly, forward kinematics means that, given the joint angle, you can find the position and orientation. However, for robotics, the task is the reverse: given the position and orientation to realize the task, you want to find out what the joint configuration is to achieve this task. This requires the solving of the inverse kinematics problem, to express Q in terms of the desired position and orientation. And finally, I give a brief overview of trajectory planning based on the camera, which is basically how you specify this x here. We say "given x", but actually we need to plan for x, plan for the position and orientation.

Trajectory planning is actually something simple. It is just to specify the position and orientation with respect to the base frame. This base frame is the reference frame, as I said, obtained from the DH assignment, the very first step, making sure that z-zero is aligned with the joint axis of joint one; x and y are up to you to assign. Once you fix that, all the commands should be issued with respect to the base frame, or planned with respect to the base frame. That means, where is the location of this object along the x axis, where is the location along the y axis, and what is the location along the z axis? This is position. Orientation is how you should approach the part, and how you align your gripper so as to pick up the part. Therefore, to summarize, the concept of trajectory planning is actually just to plan the task with respect to your reference frame. And you can see that it will be task-dependent. Again, there is no unified theorem. What we are going to do is give a lot of examples to go through the trajectory planning problem, or basically the task planning problem.

There are two basic types of planning. One is called point-to-point. The other one is called trajectory or path. Point-to-point, as the name implies, is when you want to move from one point to another. You pick up one part at one location and put it down at the other location. As for trajectory planning, it involves a desired path. Maybe you want to draw a straight line, or you want to follow a straight line to do welding, or you want to follow a circle, which means that the path between your starting point and ending point is also important. Point-to-point is when you only consider the desired locations and move from one location to another; the path in between is not important, that means that you may move in any way, according to the controller. Two types of planning that we will go through using some examples: point-to-point and trajectory.

So I say again, there is no systematic way, and the parts are also located at different locations. What you need to do is just to locate the part with respect to your reference frame. Firstly, you need to identify the reference frame, which is from the DH assignment, and if you purchase a robot, it is from the user manual. Then you start to plan your work cell, for example, put all your parts around the robot. And then you start to identify the location of the part with respect to the base frame.

Here, we show you examples of gravity part feeders. I will just focus on this location only. After you understand this, you can similarly do it for the other locations; they are just at different locations. In this particular location, take note that it is located at a certain distance away from x, and then y is equal to zero. Take note that y is equal to zero here, that means that we assume that this part is located at y equal to zero. As for the rest, if y is not equal to zero, you just find out what y is and modify similarly. To simplify the discussion, we will only consider the x-z plane. The x-z plane means y is equal to zero.

This is a gravity part feeder. It means that you use the law of gravity. For example, suppose that the robot end effector removes this part, that means that you pick up this part and put it at the other location. Once this part is removed, this part which is stacking on top must be able to slide down. Why do we do that? Because we want all the parts to come to this fixed location. After you remove one, the other one will slide down to the fixed location, so that you do not have to keep planning your task. All the parts will be transported, in this case sliding down, to a fixed location, and your program will just try to command the end effector to this fixed position to pick up this part and put it at the desired location.

Now, in order for the part to slide down, the angle of inclination must be sufficiently large, so that it overcomes the frictional force. Do not need to worry too much about this equation. This equation just means that your angle of inclination must be large enough so that the part can slide down. And that angle obviously will depend on the friction between the part and the part feeder. If it is very smooth, then you can slide down at a very small angle. Otherwise, the angle of inclination must be quite large for it to slide down. So you need not worry. Basically, physically, you can just keep increasing this beta until it can slide down. So this is what you can do in practice. That angle of inclination must be known; that means that you fix it beforehand so that it can slide down. Then we will need to command the robot to pick up this part.

And one important point to take note of is that there is no gap between the parts. Here, it shows some gap, but in practice there is no gap, because it will just keep sliding down, one stacked on top of the others. This basically means that in order to pick up the part, you cannot put your end effector this way; there is no gap in between. The only way you can pick it up is this way. The end effector should be aligned this way, with the front and the back surface. Then you can pick up the part. Take note of this; that means that we have to plan the orientation carefully.

First, your approach vector is always perpendicular to the surface of the object. If there is an angle of inclination, in this case beta, because we need to have an angle of inclination so that the part can always slide down to this location after one is removed, this basically means that we need to define a vector R3, the approach vector, which is perpendicular to this surface. How do you specify this approach vector? It is specified with respect to the base frame. That means, how do you define that vector using the base frame, which is obtained from the first step of the DH algorithm? We know that in order to represent it, in this case in two-dimensional space, you need to resolve the vector along each of the components. For example, I can split this R3 into two vectors. Vector addition: this vector plus this vector is equal to R3. I put them in this direction because I want to represent them using x and z. In fact, you can see that the vertical one corresponds to z, and the horizontal one corresponds to x. That means that I can get the vectors along the x and z axes, add them, and it will give me R3.

Next is to determine the magnitude of the vectors. Firstly, R3 is a unit vector. Always remember, the magnitude of R3 is always equal to one because it is a unit vector. If it is a unit vector, and if you know the angle of inclination beta, which means that this angle is known, then you can determine that the vertical one has magnitude cosine beta. Why cosine beta? Because this is a unit vector, magnitude one. One times cosine beta basically gives you the magnitude, which is cosine beta, simply. And the horizontal one will be one times sine beta, which is simply sine beta. I am trying to explain how we arrive at this. Basically, this is x, y, and z. Remember, we are in the x-z plane, y is equal to zero. If y is not equal to zero, you just put something there. Here y is equal to zero. Then x is basically this one, the x axis, and the magnitude is sine beta. We have sine beta times (1, 0, 0), which is this vector. Now, this is in this direction, which is the opposite of this. In this case, it will be negative sine beta times (1, 0, 0). When you add, by vector addition, basically you get this one. That means, let me just put it this way: sine beta times (1, 0, 0), plus cosine beta downward, which is (0, 0, negative one). You add them up, vector addition, and it basically gives you this R3.

What you see over here is that you want to specify this approach vector using the base frame, because for a robot, the reference frame is the base. Everything has to be issued with respect to the base frame. Then the robot can understand where the location is, solve the inverse kinematics problem, and find the joint angles to pick up the part. This is the idea. This is the orientation in terms of the approach direction.

Now, these parts are stacked end to end, so that when one is removed, the other one can slide down, by the law of gravity. Which means that you can only approach it this way. You can only grasp it on this front and back surface, because there is no gap in between; otherwise, they would be stacking on top of the others. This basically means that if you have an end effector, you need to rotate it so that your sliding surface, remember that the end effector has a sliding vector, is either pointing towards you or away from you. Now, this is your x axis, and this is your z axis, and remember they are from the DH algorithm, first step. Where is y? It is not sketched over here, but actually y is here, according to the right-hand rule. We know that y is pointing into this whiteboard. Remember, your sliding direction is either pointing towards you or away from you. That means either pointing into the whiteboard or out of the whiteboard. This basically means that there are two possibilities, because y is (0, 1, 0). Either positive or negative (0, 1, 0) will be your sliding vector. As I said, both are okay, because you rotate 180 degrees and the gripper is still pointing in the same direction.

After you have obtained the approach and the sliding (sliding is either pointing towards you or away from you), then the last one must be fixed by the right-hand rule. You can either sketch it out or you can use the cross product, R2 cross R3 in this order, to find out what R1 is. So to summarize, R3 must be specified by a vector which is at 90 degrees with respect to this surface, and it will depend on the orientation of the part feeder. The second one, the sliding vector, does not depend on the part feeder orientation, because it is either pointing towards you or away from you. For example, if you choose pointing towards you, you put the negative; if you choose the same direction as y, that would be positive. After that, you take the cross product between them, or you sketch it out. You can actually check that R2 will be pointing in this direction. That means that you must imagine that here there is R2 pointing towards you. Then according to the right-hand rule, R1 should be pointing upward. After that, you can just try to sketch it out using two vectors, this vector and this vector, if you sketch it graphically. The other way is just to calculate it directly. If you sketch it out this way, then, remember just now this was beta, this is a unit vector one. This means that this is sine beta, this is cosine beta. Cosine is in the x direction, sine is in the z direction. So you can basically specify the normal vector with respect to your reference frame.

So I hope you get the idea that basically planning is just to specify the position and the orientation vectors with respect to your reference frame, so that the robot can understand what the position and orientation it is aiming for should be, because its reference frame is the base frame. And then solve the inverse kinematics problem to find out the joint configuration to accomplish this task.

We have specified only the orientation. Next, let us go through how we specify the position for this gravity part feeder. As I said, this part always slides down to this location, which will be located at a fixed distance away from your base, at the end of the part feeder. Let us call it F, a fixed distance away from the base, maybe ten cm, depending on the actual work cell configuration. And I will enlarge this diagram. Again, I have provided all these slides; if you want, you can go and download them. If not, you can just refer to this one; it gives you the same thing.

Now, here, basically, to find the location of the center of the part: usually the robot end effector will try to aim for the center, aim for this centroid so that it is stable. In case of any slight inaccuracies, you have more tolerance. In this case, we want to locate the centroid, the center of the part, with respect to the base. Let us look at x. The position of the centroid along the x axis is simply F plus this distance minus this distance: F plus this one minus the one on top. That means the lines added up together minus the line on top. And we can actually relate all the dimensions according to the dimensions of your parts, as well as the angle of inclination. Let us assume that this is a cube with length C. A cube means all the lengths are equal to the same, everything will be C, and the centroid will be at half. If we know this one, half C, and you know this angle of inclination, for example, you can see that half C cosine beta gives you this length: F plus half C cosine beta. F plus half C sine beta is this location, but the centroid is located here, so you must subtract half C sine beta. Then you get this location of the part with respect to the base. Basically, it is just some geometrical information. As you change the angle of inclination, you just put it here. We derive a general one so that any time you want to move it, or any time you try to change the angle of inclination (maybe the part has more friction, you need to increase the angle of inclination), then you can just easily change this one.

y is equal to zero. Remember, in this case, the x-z plane, y is equal to zero. That means this centroid is located at y equal to zero. If not, then just put something there, according to the physical location.

Lastly, z. z is this axis. The centroid is located at a distance away from the origin of the base frame, which is indicated by these two green lines. This plus this will be equal to the z location. That means the centroid is located at a distance away from the base along the z axis, which is pointing upward. Over here, we can see that this green line, this distance, is basically half C sine beta, plus this one, which is half C cosine beta. Half C sine beta plus half C cosine beta gives you the centroid location with respect to the base along the z axis.

That means position planning is just to locate the location of your part. Typically, we aim for the centroid. After this part is removed, the next one will slide down to the same location, so we do not have to keep planning it. You make sure that something is transporting the part to a fixed location, so we just plan it once. If it is changing, typically you should use vision, as in the previous example.

We managed to locate the part with respect to the base, and we have also planned the orientation by using the base. And this is the final transformation matrix of the part with respect to the base. Again, this is the location of the part with respect to the base. This represents the orientation of how your end effector should align and approach, with respect to the base frame. Remember that the approach vector should be perpendicular to the top surface of the part, and that will depend on the angle of inclination. Then your end effector can only grasp from the front and the back of the part, because there is no gap between each part. It is (0, 1, 0) or (0, negative one, 0), because you must align with the y axis, which is either pointing towards or away from you. Two solutions. After that, x comes out from the right-hand rule. In fact, x is redundant; it is just to complete it. Usually, the approach and the sliding are sufficient to complete the task.

Basically, to summarize, trajectory planning is just to specify the location of the object with respect to the base frame, and to think how the end effector should approach the part and specify that desired orientation with respect to the base frame. After you have obtained x, then you need to fit it to the inverse kinematics algorithm, which is obtained by solving the forward kinematics equation, so as to find out what the joint configuration is to achieve this task. Because always remember that robots are low-level machines. You must tell it exactly what to do: what should joint one, two, three, four, five, six be so that your end effector will reach for a particular position with a particular orientation? And that comes from path planning.

This slide basically summarizes the concept that we have learned so far, and I have also updated it. We will go through more examples, because as I said, path planning is a very specific task, but some of them can be planned in advance in a more general way. Just now, we planned it in terms of a general angle of inclination, a general distance F, so that you can just put in the particular parameters as your workspace changes.

Next, I am going to talk about one very common path planning problem. It is called the pick-and-place problem. Now, the pick point is easy. Just now, we have shown it: if you have a location at a certain distance away from your base frame, you can plan the pick point easily. Where is it located with respect to the base frame, how you want the end effector to approach the part, and put it in terms of your base coordinates. So this is called the pick point, where you want to pick up the part. Pick-and-place means, after you pick it up, you want to place it at another location. After you pick it up, you want to drop it in a certain container. So that will be pick-and-place.

Now, at one glance, it looks like only two points, pick point and place point, but it is more complex than that. It is illustrated over here. After you pick it, you need to move it to some location, and then before you place it down, you also need to position it well at another location. Let us look at this again. After you pick it up, in fact, you need to move to one location, vertically upwards. This is called the lift-off point. After you pick it, you lift it up to a certain location. All this depends on how high you want to lift it up. Then you move it to this location, aim for it, and place it down. Altogether, actually four points: pick, lift it here, come to this location, and place it down. Not just two points. Actually at least four points, sometimes even more.

So the pick point depends on the location of the object that you want to pick, with respect to your base reference frame. If your base reference frame is that, then you just locate where it is with respect to your reference frame. After you have planned your pick point, the lift-off point can be easily planned with respect to the pick point, because it has a certain constant offset away from it. This slide basically illustrates how you need to plan in order to move it to a lift-off point. That means, after you pick it, you need to lift it up to a certain position.

Now, this looks mathematical, but let me just explain it this way. You have picked up something; that is your pick point. The pick point is already known, and the orientation to pick it up is already planned. What you want to do is move it to a certain location away from your pick point, before you aim for the other position and place it down. This is the so-called lift-off point. Now, let us look at this base frame. Everything must be specified in terms of your base frame. Suppose that here we have the location of the pick point with respect to the base frame. This explains this vector over here, which is the pick location vector, x, y, z. Where is the location of the part to be picked up, with respect to the base frame, x, y, z? If this is obtained already, we can have this position vector here. Next, you have the orientation to pick up this part. You aim for a certain approach direction, you align the sliding direction with one of the flat surfaces to pick it up. Basically, you have R_pick. This is the location to pick it up and the orientation to pick it up.

Now, your approach vector, if you are at this mobile frame looking at this approach vector, is always (0, 0, 1). This is defined as I3. This is the mobile coordinate. Someone sitting at the end effector, looking at the approach direction, no matter how it turns, it is always (0, 0, 1). But if you want to transform it into the base frame, you need to multiply by the transformation matrix. This matrix basically transforms the approach vector into the base frame, which is a fixed frame. This basically means that this distance over here in this lift-off point is simply to transform the approach direction defined in the mobile frame into the base frame. At this stage, this vector is defined this way.

Now, to lift it off, you need to move in the opposite direction. This is the approach; to lift it off, you need to move in the opposite direction. That explains this negative term here. After you pick it up, you are going to move in the reverse direction, and V is the distance along that unit vector. This is something very flexible, depending on the orientation to pick it up, depending on the distance which you want to withdraw to; then you just put it there. And then you can see that vector plus vector, vector addition: the location of the lift-off point with respect to the base is this vector plus this vector, and you basically get the lift-off point. This one you can view as P_lift-off, the location of the lift-off point. And it can be planned from the pick point, at a certain distance away from the pick-up point. So it is kind of moving backward. After you plan the pick point, from the orientation and the position, you move backward by a certain distance. Negative means move backward. Then you reach that position, and by vector addition, I can locate the lift-off point. And you maintain the same orientation. So R_pick is also used.

So this is what we will do: pick it up, lift it, and then move to a certain location before you place it down. Let us look at it again: pick point, lift it, lift-off, then place it down. The place point is also easy to plan: where is the location with respect to your base frame? That will be the place point. The only thing that we have to take note of is that, unlike the pick point, which can have some tolerance, the place point requires quite high accuracy. Because sometimes you may crush it, if you do not specify the place-down point properly, you may actually try to push it downward and crush the object. In some cases, you may drop it; once you drop it from a certain distance, after it drops, it may not be at the exact location. This requires some careful planning. The tolerance must be quite tight, and your robot must have good accuracy and repeatability in order to achieve this. This is just some precaution on the place-down point.

Now, this is another point we call the set-down point. We have seen that if you have the pick point, you can plan the lift-off point. Similarly, if you have the place point, you can also plan the set-down point, the same thing. You just plan it according to the place point. Once you locate the place point, just move backward with respect to the place-down point. This explains this matrix over here, which is very similar to what I explained just now. You have basically the mobile frame approach direction, transform it into the reference frame, move in the reverse direction by a certain distance, add up with the place location. That means this vector plus this vector will give you this vector, which is the location of the set-down point. All this can be done in a general way. It can be any distance; if the location changes, you just change this location.

Altogether, at least four points. When I say at least four points, it means that sometimes you may need more. For example, if there is something in between the two locations, one way is that you make sure you lift sufficiently high. That means that all these points will have some constraint on V; it must be higher than the height of this obstacle. But remember that a production operation does not just do one pass. This pick-and-place task needs to be repeated many, many times, 1,000 times, 10,000 times. Suppose that each of these cycles takes a longer time, then the overall efficiency is not that high. One way to overcome this problem is that we take some shortcut, that means that instead of lifting it so high, at some point you can take a shortcut, move to another location, so as to speed up each operation. And if you repeat it 1,000 times, 10,000 times, over a long period of time, it is a significant saving in efficiency. This basically explains the next diagram over here. Sometimes you need more points.

All this can also be executed at different speeds. For example, if you want to pick up something, you need to move to the lift-up point, and you can move it very fast because there is nothing there. After that, you need to go down to pick up the object from the lift-off point, and that should be slow. Once you reach the pick point, pause it, that means zero speed, and after that, grasp it and go back to the same location. I say again, you go to the lift-off point, go down to pick it up, then you go back to the lift-off point again, and this should be performed slowly. But when you go to the intermediate point, you can do it faster, until you reach the set-down point. Then again, just do it slowly, go down, grasp it, and then withdraw back to the set-down point, and then repeat the cycle again. We go back the same way, go back to the lift-off point, pick up the part, and keep doing it. This is what we call pick-and-place operations, and this is just to illustrate that you can set the speed differently. In some cases you can do it faster, but in some cases you need to do it slowly, otherwise the task may fail sometimes.

This is pick-and-place, and lastly, I want to talk about continuous path planning. As the name implies, in this case it is not just moving from one point to another point. You also want to specify the path in between your starting point and ending point. This is called trajectory and path planning. What is the difference between these two? Path is just spatial information. It has no temporal information, no time information. For example, if we represent the motion control in terms of the tool configuration space: remember that you need to put it into the position, which is three-dimensional, and also take the approach vector, which is three-dimensional, multiplied by a function of the roll angle, that will represent your position and orientation in a minimum representation. After that, you need to plan a path for this end effector and plan the orientation for this end effector.

Let me show you an animation first. Now, you can see the orange lines are the path, a circle, straight lines, which the end effector needs to follow. Not only must it follow this path, it must also maintain some orientation. In this case, it is fixed; the orientation is fixed while performing this task. Which means that you need to specify the position of your end effector at all these points, and as a function of time. That means, at t equal to zero, where should it be? At the next sample time interval, where should it be? And you keep increasing the sample time until you reach the final time. This is called the trajectory. Once you put time information into the path, you get a trajectory.

Let us go back to this one again. Now, path is just geometric information: straight line, circle. There is no temporal information. And if you add the temporal information into it, for example, at t equal to zero you stop, then you follow the straight line, at t equal to maybe ten seconds you must reach the end. This specifies the speed, how fast you want to complete this straight line path. At any time, there is always a target point. By two seconds, you must reach this point; by three seconds, you must reach this point; by four seconds, five seconds, six seconds. At all times, you have a specific position, and that is called a trajectory. There is a difference between path and trajectory. Usually, we can plan the path first, then convert it into a trajectory by adding some time or temporal information.

Let us formally define a trajectory. Let f be a path, a curve in a tool configuration space, which is six-dimensional. Let s be defined as a function of time. This is called the speed distribution function, and it will map the time interval from t equal to zero to capital T into 0 to 1, that means you normalize it, so that at t equal to zero, this speed distribution function is zero, and at the final time it is equal to one. Basically, we just normalize it. Then f, the curve, the path, can be defined in terms of lambda, which will change from 0 to 1. As lambda changes from 0 to 1, you trace out the path. If you associate this lambda with a function of time, it basically tells you, at what time it should be at what location. Lambda will become a function of time.

At one glance, it looks very mathematical, but actually it is something that all of us know. Let me show you one example. This is a straight line path, and you want the robot to follow this straight line path, and the robot can only understand the reference frame. There must be a reference frame. If this is a reference frame, I am just showing an example, then I can define this path with respect to the reference frame, which means that y is equal to zero, and x will be changing from zero to a certain final point. If x is changing from 0 to 10, that will trace out a straight line path where y is equal to zero. There is no temporal information yet, because this is just a straight line path, geometrical information. If you put the time in, the temporal information, at t equal to zero, start at x equal to zero; at t equal to ten seconds, you must reach ten along the straight line path. Then that will become a trajectory.

Basically, this is how it works. At t equal to zero, x is equal to zero. At t equal to capital T, you should reach ten. In between, we can represent it using a straight line, where this can be represented as a function of time, because the gradient is ten divided by capital T. Then you multiply by the time, the temporal information, and basically you can get the position at any time. This is called a trajectory. At any time, you can calculate x. At t equal to zero, you can see that it is zero; at t equal to capital T, it reaches ten. This is a trajectory.

Now, what is the speed distribution function? It is simply t over here, t divided by capital T, and this is lambda, which is associated with the speed distribution function, because lambda is defined from 0 to 1. When t reaches capital T, you will reach one. s is equal to zero when t is equal to zero, s is equal to one when t is equal to capital T, and that is called your speed distribution function. Based on this example, if you go back to read this again, you will be clear. The speed distribution function basically maps the time interval of your operation time into zero and one. With this speed distribution function, you can convert your path into a trajectory with temporal information or speed information.

Let us go back to this speed distribution function again. This looks like a very simple formulation, but it has one problem, because if you differentiate this with respect to time, it is always constant. In fact, if you look at this graph, there is always a constant gradient. This basically means that at the initial point, you must start at a constant speed, and at the ending point, you end at a constant speed, which is not possible. How can you start from a finite speed, and how can you end at a finite speed, because you are supposed to stop there, not keep moving? This will have some problems, and that means that it is not possible to use this kind of speed distribution function.

What we do is that we modify it slightly. We must stop at the end point. Stop means speed equal to zero. Speed equal to zero means that the position does not change anymore. Finally, it should stop at ten; the starting point should start from zero. And speed equal to zero means the gradient is equal to zero, gradient equals zero means it is horizontal, no speed. These are the starting and ending constraints. For your trajectory x, in between, we can still use this one, maintain a constant speed in between. After that, you interpolate it, smooth it out, use some curve to smooth it out, and this will give you this trajectory.

Here I am trying to explain that you must start from zero speed initially. Then you slowly ramp up to a constant speed. Before you reach your final point, you must slowly reduce your speed to zero. You start from zero speed, increase to a constant speed, keep moving with a constant speed, and before you reach the final position, you must slowly reduce the speed back to zero.

I am trying to explain this curve over here, this graph, which is s-dot. It says that your speed should start from zero, then you ramp it up to a constant speed at a certain time interval. All this is flexible, up to you to design. Then you maintain a constant speed until you are about to stop. If you stop at capital T, a few seconds before you stop, you must start to reduce the speed to zero. That means that you ramp up the speed, maintain a constant speed, ramp it down to zero. These are just straight lines. You can easily plan it. What is your speed limit of your manipulator? You can put this constant speed here, maybe 10 metres per second, just for illustration. How many seconds do you want to ramp it up? Maybe two seconds, and this is ten seconds; then you start to ramp it down. Based on this, you can see you can actually specify all these straight lines as a function of time. That will be the differentiation of the speed distribution function, s-dot. That means it is easier to plan from s-dot. How do you get s? You plan based on s-dot: the speed starts from zero, ramps up to a constant speed within so many seconds, maintains the speed for so many seconds, then you start to reduce the speed and stop. From there, you integrate it, then you can get a smoother speed distribution function, rather than just constant speed throughout. Just now, the one I showed you is just constant speed throughout. In this case, it involves some adjustment from zero to the constant speed and then a reduction from the constant speed to zero. I say again, after you plan this one, you integrate it to get your speed distribution function, and that will enable you to start from rest and end at rest.

This example, ignore it, no need to worry about it, because next lecture we will introduce a method which will be easier. This example is just to show you the problem, so as to introduce a solution. Basically, if you have a trajectory, you need to specify the speed. If you have a desired speed for your end effector, you must specify the speed for your joints. That means that your joints must rotate at a certain speed and coordinate in such a way that your end effector will follow this trajectory at the specified speed. Which means that you have another problem: given the speed of the end effector, you want to find the speed of the joints. You must convert it to the speed of the joints, because a robot, as I said, is a low-level machine. Everything corresponds to the joint. This one is just to show you that if you want to get the speed, you need to differentiate all these equations, which is actually quite tedious, because these are not straightforward equations. They are tangent, arcsine, which can still be differentiated sometimes, in some cases, but that is not the best solution. All this is just a differentiation of the inverse kinematics equation. You differentiate the first inverse kinematics equation, you get this one. Then you differentiate Q3 plus Q4, you get this one. After that, you differentiate the Q3 inverse kinematics, you get this one, followed by Q4 and Q5. All the differentiations are shown here. But this is just for your information, because next week we will introduce a method which is easier. These methods will involve differentiations of the inverse kinematics equation, which is very, very difficult to obtain.

So we have introduced trajectory planning, which will be task-dependent. But the main idea is to specify the position and orientation of your task with respect to your base reference frame. And there are two main types of planning. One is point-to-point, the other one is path planning or trajectory planning. After that, after you plan all this, you need to put it into your inverse kinematics algorithm to find the corresponding joint angles. In terms of the speed, you need to find out what Q-dot is. One way is to differentiate this equation on both sides. But that is not the best way to do it. As I mentioned, we will only talk about this next week.

Finally, for trajectory planning, sometimes we cannot specify the path using some geometrical information. A straight line can be quite easily planned; a straight line you have equations to represent. A circle you can also represent using equations, and then assign temporal information by using the speed distribution function. But there are some paths, for example this one, that are very, very difficult to specify using some equation. This explains the purpose of this section 4.4, interpolated motion. Because any path can be broken down into many points, depending on how accurate you want. Which means that my path, I can identify many points, sufficient points, so that I can then plan the trajectory from one to another. That means you plan the trajectory from here to here, then plan the trajectory from here to here, and you keep planning it, then you form a continuous path as a function of time. Remember, trajectory means that I want this path as a function of time; at any time, I must know what the location is and what the speed is at this location.

Here, I will just show you two points, because if you know this, you can similarly do it for the rest. You keep doing this until you reach the final point. Let us look at just these two points. Now, here we use a cubic polynomial. That means it involves t to the power of three. We are going to plan the path as a function of time. A cubic polynomial means t to the power of three, t to the power of two, t, and a constant, and there are four unknowns, A, B, C, D. That means that to represent a trajectory in between these two points as a function of time, we need to find out four parameters, A, B, C, and D. Now, if you have four unknowns, to solve for four unknowns, A, B, C, D, you need four equations. Where do we get the four equations? Basically, the positions: starting position, ending position, gives you two pieces of information. How about the other two? Starting velocity, ending velocity. This explains why we use a cubic polynomial, because you have starting position and ending position (two), and starting velocity and ending velocity (another two). That means that if you only use position and speed, you can only use a cubic polynomial. If you want to specify the acceleration, starting acceleration and ending acceleration, in this case you can put t to the power of five, because you have six unknowns, one, two, three, four, five, six, six unknowns, you need six equations. Where do you get the six equations? Two from position, two from velocity, two from acceleration, starting and ending.

This is the basic idea. That means that I want one trajectory to fit the starting and ending position and to fit the starting and ending velocity. I want to find A, B, C, D so that at t equal to zero, it starts from this position with this velocity, and at t equal to the next time interval, it ends at this position with this velocity. This is the idea. If you understand that, the rest is something that we all know.

Firstly, at t equal to zero, suppose that you have this starting position. This means that when you put t equal to zero into here, you get only D. This basically means that D is your starting position, if that is the very first point. Then at the next time interval, capital T, you want it to reach B1. You put t equal to capital T, you get this equation, and you must reach this position, which you obtain from the path. You just note down all these points, and in between will be a function of time, which we try to find out through this equation. From here, we have two equations now, equation one, equation two, but you have four unknowns, A, B, C, D. We need two more equations. Where do you get the other equations? Just now I mentioned, velocity: initial velocity and ending velocity. How do you get velocity? Differentiate this equation, you get the velocity. Velocity is 3*A*t squared plus 2*B*t plus C. D differentiated disappears, because it is constant, independent of time. Then at t equal to zero, if you have an initial speed, maybe speed equal to zero, then C will be equal to zero, depending on the actual speed. We can basically put t equal to zero here, and we get C, which will be your initial speed. Next, at t equal to capital T, you put capital T here, and that will be your final speed, and you get another equation. Altogether, four equations. You solve for A, B, C, D. In other words, you want to find A, B, C, D that satisfy the starting and ending constraints: starting position constraint, ending position constraint (two), starting velocity constraint, ending velocity constraint (another two). Because we have constraints, you can form four equations to solve for the A, B, C, D.

Now, if you want acceleration, you need to use a fifth-order polynomial. Then you will have two more equations to specify the constraints. You solve for all these equations, and you can get this, which is inside the slide. I am just explaining how we get all this, A, B, C, D. If you understand this concept, you can do it similarly for the next two points. In this case, what you need to do is: you have one equation at t equal to maybe T1, starting position, starting velocity; at t equal to T2, the next time interval, you have another two equations. Actually, it is just this: A*t cubed plus B*t squared plus C*t plus D. Then you put t equal to T1, one equation equal to B1; t equal to T2, put it in here, equal to B2, get another equation. After that, you differentiate this to get velocity. Then again, you put t equal to T1, equate it to V1, you get the third equation. Put t equal to T2, equate it to V2, you get the fourth equation. And then put it into the computer, four equations with four unknowns, you can get A, B, C, D for the next time interval.

All this is changing. That means you need to keep doing it, at each segment your A, B, C, D will be different. One thing to take note of is that your ending constraint for this segment will become the starting constraint of the next segment; they must be the same. Otherwise, your trajectory will not be continuous; there will be a jump in speed or position. So I say again, the ending constraint of the first segment becomes the starting constraint of the next segment. Same thing, you keep repeating: the ending of this will become the starting of the next segment, so as to achieve a continuous path planning.

With this, I end my lecture on trajectory planning, which is basically how to specify the task by referring to the base frame. It is not unique; it is really task-dependent. What we did is just to go through some very common applications, point-to-point. For trajectory, there are also two types. One is that you can easily write down the equation, the equation of a straight line, the equation of a circle. The other is that you cannot even associate them with equations, then you use interpolation, break them down into multiple points to specify the path. Then you just plan segment by segment, based on the temporal information, by fitting the starting and ending constraints in terms of positions and velocities. If you also want to specify the acceleration, then you need two more degrees of freedom, that means a fifth-order polynomial. Because this requires differentiations of the inverse kinematics equation, next week we will do something different: we will differentiate the forward kinematics equation and then derive something similar. That will be next week.

And a reminder on your first CA: it will be held on 23 September, and it will start at 7:00 p.m. Only a 30-minute quiz. The topic will cover everything that I cover today, week four. And we will do it in this LT. I will announce the seating arrangement later by e-mail, so please prepare for it. The format is similar to exam questions, exam format, paper and pen. You can refer to the past year exam questions; that will be the format for this quiz. And there will be two more quizzes that will be announced by the Part 2 lecturer after the recess. So I end my lecture here today. Thank you.
