Good evening, class. We will start the lectures. Last week, basically, we were just reviewing some of the basic mathematics, which is required for the modeling of the kinematics model of a robot manipulator. Let us review some of the key concepts in the last lecture before we move on.

Here we want to derive a model so that given the joint angles of the robot, for example, given joint one, joint two, three, four and five, suppose that you have five joints, how do we actually find the position and orientation of the end effector? That means that where is this location of the end effector with respect to the base frame, and what is the orientation, in terms of the rotation of the mobile frame with respect to the base frame?

You can see from this figure that it involved two basic transformations. First is a rotation. The orientation is basically described by how your end effector frame, which is the mobile frame, moving together with the joint angle. Which means that as your joint angle changes, your mobile coordinates will be rotated. At the same time, this mobile frame will be translated with respect to the base frame. Two types of basic transformation which we reviewed in the last lecture in order to model the forward kinematics.

Three fundamental rotations. Why three, because we are operating in a three dimensional space, x, y, z. Here, we call 1, 2, 3, but actually it is x, y, z, Cartesian space. This is a rotation about x axis, this is a rotation about y axis, and this is the rotation about z axis. This basically means that there are three basic rotations in the three dimensional space. For the translations, we do not need three translation matrices because we can put everything into this single matrix. This is x, and this is translation of y, and this is translation of z. Altogether, there are four fundamental transformation matrices, and we put it into the homogeneous coordinate, because that will enable you to do matrix multiplications and inverse matrices. Suppose that you put a vector with rotations, you will get only three by four. The idea of fundamental transformation matrix is very simple. You complete the square. Instead of three by four, we make it four by four square matrix, so that we can multiply them together, and we can also multiply with vectors. We can also find the inverse matrix easily.

That was a quick review of last week's lectures. The videos are also recorded, you may want to review it when necessary before coming for the next lecture, for every lecture. Here today, we'll move on to model the kinematics of robot manipulators based on all these coordinate transformations that we have learned last week.

Now, basically, the objective of modeling forward kinematics starts by systematically assigning coordinates to each of the joints and links. Then later on, we'll find the relationship between all of these coordinates, and then we multiply them together to get a single composite transformation matrix. We'll also use the composite transformation rule, which means that if you rotate or translate with respect to the fixed frame, basically you pre multiply, and with respect to the mobile frame, you post multiply.

Today we will apply all this, and also recall that for every joint, it can be either a rotational joint or a translational joint. Robots, unlike humans. Human only have revolute joints, can only rotate. But this is a machine. In some cases, you may see some extension of the link. This is called prismatic joint.

Here, we will need to define four kinematic parameters, which are required for the modeling of the forward kinematics or direct kinematics. Here there are two joint parameters and two link parameters.

Firstly, joint angle. Joint angle is easy to understand, is the angle caused by the actuation of the motor. That is called the joint angle. There's another parameter associated with the joints, it's called joint distance. Joint distance is harder to understand. But let me show you an actual robot first, before we come back to this slide.

I will take up this robot system. Now, for this figure, you can see that there's one joint over here. Imagine that there's a motor attached to this part and it will start to move this link. When this link rotate, the angle of this link with respect to the previous link, will be called the joint angle. This is easy to understand.

There's another one which I want to illustrate to you is this joint distance. Joint distance can be observed over here. Now, this is one joint. As I rotate this joint, the previous link is rotating. So the angle is changing, because there's a motor there. Now, joint distance is fixed. Joint distance is actually the distance between the upper link and the lower link. That means that if you can draw the center of this link, there's a displacement with respect to the center of the link, which is below. So this is called the joint distance.

Suppose that you go back to this figure again, it will be easy to understand. And if you compare to the figure just now, basically, what we have is that we have one joint connecting two links. This is a joint, which is this joint axis. Here you must imagine that there's a motor connected to this joint axis and it is rotating the link k, which means that when this motor is rotating, this link will be rotating as well. As the angle is changing, we basically have a joint angle. Now, joint distance is actually distance between this link and this link. This is called the joint distance. That means that if the link are stacking on top of each other, then there's a joint distance. You can also visualize that if this link is just directly attached over here, instead of this, then in this case, your joint distance will be equal to zero. Two joint parameters. One is the joint angle because this is a revolute joint. The other one is the joint distance.

Just like one joint connecting two links, there are also one link with two adjacent joints. For example, suppose that you have a motor actuating this link. At the other side, there's another motor, actuating the next link. We have two joints. In between, there's a link. In this case, there are two link parameters as well. One is called the link length. Link length is actually easy to understand, the length of the link. The other one is called link twist angle.

Link twist angle is slightly more difficult to understand. Again, let's go to the actual robots to take a look. Over here, I have two joints. This is joint one. And this is joint two. Joint one, joint two, and in between there's one link. Now, you may want to note that this is the rotation axis. Rotation axis means that this robot is rotating with respect to a line, and this line is vertically upward. If you look at the second joint and rotate it, you'll see that they are parallel. It's also vertically upward.

Now, if you go back to the actual diagram again, we'll see that actually over here, I have two joint axis and they are not parallel. They make an angle between each other. Just now, the previous case, because they are parallel, in the sense that you have one joint axis, and another joint axis, they are parallel, therefore, this link twist angle will be equal to zero, because they are parallel. Suppose that let us assume that the motor is not this way. Suppose that the motor is this way, that means that if the rotational axis is this way, while the other one is vertical, then it will be 90 degree. Actually a link twist angle is just the angle between the adjacent rotational axis.

These are the four types of kinematic parameters, two joint parameters, and two link parameters.

As for the end effector, usually we define the coordinate according to the physical meaning. This diagram shows three dimensional coordinates, x, y, z, attached to the end effector. Over here, we call the vector in which the direction of the end effector is pointing towards the approach vector. Which means that if you draw the end effector, the direction in which your end effector is pointing, we call the approach vector. For example, the end effector may approach an object before it grabs it. In order to grab it, sometimes you also need to rotate your gripper direction. Over here, we have another vector, the sliding vector. As the name implied, you can visualize it as the sliding of the gripper. The gripper can open and close. Therefore, that is a direction which is parallel to the sliding direction.

In this case, take note that the approach vector is unique because you don't do it in the reverse way. You approach in the forward direction. But sliding vector is not unique. We have two choices over here. One is this way, it can be the other way as well. Both are fine. That means that when we assign frames to a robot, we have some flexibility in the assignment. We'll just choose one of the directions. And after you have fixed these two, the other one is fixed by right hand rule. That means that after you have fixed two vectors, the other one, you must follow right hand rule to fix the other axis. Review your right hand rule as necessary because in this course, for forward kinematics, we'll use right hand rule to assign the coordinates.

With this, we are now ready to introduce the most fundamental algorithm in robotics. All courses in robotics start by studying the kinematics. The forward kinematics models can be derived in a very systematic way. In the early days, the researchers Denavit and Hartenberg came up with a systematic way of assigning the coordinates. This is just a standardization in assigning coordinates. Because imagine that suppose that you are given a robot. How do we actually assign x, y, z to the base? How do we assign the coordinate to each of the joint? Which one is x, which one is y, which one is z? Suppose that you do not standardize the robotics design. Then you can imagine that every one of you will come up with different coordinate assignment. If you pass it over to another stage for fabrication, those people in the fabrication team may not be able to understand your assignment as well. DH algorithm is nothing but a way to standardize the assignment. That means that how should we assign x, y, z to each of the joints, starting from the base until we reach the end effector.

As I said, we are operating in a three dimensional space, that means that you need to assign x, y and z. Here, k is equal to zero means that we are starting from the base. When k is equal to n, we'll reach the mobile frame, which is the end effector frame.

We will start from the base, and if you read DH algorithm carefully, it says that first, use right hand rule for all. Then make sure that the z axis of your base frame is aligned with the axis of joint one. That means you search for joint one in the physical robot. See how is it rotated. Then you identify the joint axis. That will be your z0 axis.

In fact, you can see that z for the subsequent joints will be aligned with the axis of the joint. It's very easy to remember. All the joint axis will be assigned as z.

Now, for example, if you have a revolute joint, then basically this will be the axis of rotation. This is rotating with respect to this axis. If it's rotating with respect to this axis, there are two directions in which you can assign z. It could be this direction. It can be the other way round. The assignment is not unique. It's just a standardization with some flexibility. What is the difference in assigning in two directions? The difference is that according to right hand rules, if you assign this way, then this will be your positive rotation. You try your right hand rule. If this thumb is my z axis, and I curl this way, you can see that this indicate the positive direction. But if you assign the other way round, then the other direction will be positive. It's actually to tell you which direction of rotation will be positive and which direction will be negative. But it is fine, so long as you assign it and then draw clearly in the DH diagram. Everything will be clear.

For revolute joint is quite easy to understand. For prismatic joint, which means that you can translate, move. Basically prismatic joint is also actuated by motor. This is just an illustration of how we create prismatic joint, which is translational motion. We do not look at this rotation, because your link will move this way, not rotating. This means you can have two direction as well. This direction or this direction for translation. What is the meaning? Actually, nothing much because if you put this way, it means this side will be positive z. If you put the other way, then it means that the other side will be positive z. This linear scale is easier to understand. For prismatic joint, z indicate the direction of positive z. For revolute joint, it indicate the direction of the positive angle.

This is how we look at the z axis. Therefore, first step of DH algorithm is to identify all the rotation axis and as well as the prismatic joint translation axis of the joint, and you label them as z axis. z0, starting from z0 from the base, all the way until the end effector.

Next, then you start to look at all the z. This is current z axis. This is the previous z axis. And then find the intersections of them. That will be the origin of the next frame. That means you must see where the frame is located. After that, x is also selected with respect to z. In fact, x is assigned as a direction perpendicular to the current z axis and the previous z axis. Finally, y comes up naturally from right hand rule.

If you are a beginner, you see this for the first time, is always confusing. Don't worry about that. We will go through them in a few examples and you must learn by reviewing it. You cannot just look at it one time. After you've completed this lectures today, if you go back tomorrow or later, and you review it, then you get a better understanding. If anything still not so clear, you watch the video again, so that next week, you can come with a better understanding.

This is how we assign it, and we will go through them one by one, using some examples. I will use a very simple example first to illustrate the concept, only two joints.

Let me show you roughly how this works. This is quite common in each robot. If you look at most of the robots, this is the first joint. It is actually trying to rotate the base with respect to the vertical axis. This is my first joint. Where is your z axis? Vertically upward. As I rotate, you must observe the joint axis. Vertically upwards. This is my z axis. Then I rotate the second joint. My second joint is coming out of this board, if I put it in this direction, coming out of this board or into the board. So there are two motors. The one rotation axis is upward. The other one is coming out of the whiteboard or into this whiteboard.

If you go back to this example again, this is what it means. I have motor one, which is rotating the base. I'm only looking at two joints. I have a motor one, which is rotating at the base. I have another one, which is rotating the second link, but I do not sketch out the second link, just to illustrate the concept.

Now, in your textbook or most of the textbook, you'll see that it only gives you this one and this one. This is because you're supposed to refer to the algorithm over here, refer to the DH algorithm and try to sketch it out by yourself. In the lectures, I'll show you one by one, how to sketch it out. But I would not put it in the notes because I want you to try to sketch it out by yourself as well. But however, as I mentioned in my e-mail, if you think that you need that, then you should go to the video and take a snapshot. So that will not be provided because you should try to sketch it up yourself.

Let's look at this and see how we can sketch this out step by step, starting from this, how we ended up with this DH diagram over here. Firstly, you can see that there is a motor. Actually, you'll see all this compartment for robots. That is to house the motor. Motor is inside. And as you send a command from your computer to this motor, send a voltage signals, for example, it'll start to rotate. And in this case, this is the axis of rotation. Axis of rotation, you can either put upward or downward. So two choices. And you should use right hand rules.

Suppose that you have identified z. Then your thumb will be z. The other two will be x and y. x basically rotate towards y. This is how I remember. I use my thumb. If you put your thumb this way, and then indicate in this curl direction, usually x rotate towards y. You assign one of the axis, then the other one will be perpendicular. You should review your right hand rules because we will use extensively in the DH assignment.

So let's come back to the actual robot system, the scheme. Now we have identified the rotation axis. Therefore, you have two choices. Upward or downward. Now, usually, we will choose upward, because this is basically the base. For example, on the table. If you put z upward, it means that everything above the base, above the table, will be called positive z. This is easier to understand. Suppose that you assign downward, nothing wrong with that, is just that everything that you refer to will become negative z. Usually, we will assign upward direction. In some cases, we need to exercise some of the intuition, physical meanings, to assign it. In this case, maybe it's better to make z upward so that everything will be positive. I assign this way. This explain how this was sketched in the textbook.

How about x and y? If you refer to the DH algorithm again, it didn't mention about x and y. Which means if it's not mentioned, you have the freedom to assign it. Any direction is fine, so long as it satisfied the right hand rule. That means that you assign this as the z. If you want to assign this as x, is fine. If someone else want to assign this as x, is also fine. This can also be x. It's up to you to assign. In fact, it is quite easy to understand. Imagine that I'm standing at this location. Let us standardize that above the ground is z. But however, which direction is x, which direction is y, is up to you to define. So long as we define it properly with a base coordinate, then everybody will just refer to this. So over here, if you read the algorithm again, it only asks you to define z, and x and y for the base frame you have some freedom. And the only constraint is that your x and y must be assigned according to right hand rule. As I said, x rotated towards y will give you z.

If you move to joint two, there is a motor which is mounted here, and it is rotating the next link, which is not shown over here. But in subsequent examples, we will look at the complete robot. And over here, we can observe two things: the rotational joint axis. This is two dimensional. We are using two dimensional to illustrate three dimensional. Therefore, if you see this line drawing as a slanted angle, it actually means that it's coming out of the board. If you strictly draw it in two dimensional, it will be just one dot, that means that it's actually pointing towards you or away from you. In this case, there are two choices. You can either choose z1, the next joint, to be this direction, or you can choose it to be this direction. Both are fine. DH assignment is not unique. It gives you some flexibility. Standardization is good but not to restrict too much. We will choose the same as the textbook, inward. But there's nothing wrong if you choose the other way around. Both are correct. I'll follow this textbook and choose inward, but I stress again, we can choose outward as well.

This is the first step of DH algorithm, assign all the rotational axis of the joint as your z axis. After that, everything will be with respect to the z axis. So you assign everything at the physical location of the joint. The next step is that find the intersections of them. That will be the origin of your next frame. The origin of your base frame is always at the base. The origin of the next frame, you need to extend both z axis and see where they intersect. The position where they intersect will be the origin of the next frame. At this stage, we only know z1 of the next frame. We have not assigned x and y yet.

The next step is to assign x. Everything is with respect to z. You can see that over here, it says that just assign x to be orthogonal, that means perpendicular, 90 degree, to both of the z axis, current z axis and the previous z axis. Let's go back to the example again. This is my z1, going into the whiteboard. This is my z0, upward. If you draw it here, this is z0. This is z1, going into the board, and they are 90 degree. You must select x axis, which is perpendicular to both. It's very easy to understand. It is either this way or this way, will be perpendicular to both. That's called orthogonal. Again, your x axis is not unique. Some of you may want to do it this way. Some of you may want to do it the other way. Both are correct. That means that if you try to sketch it up and try to compare answers, typically, you will just see that one will be one direction, the other one may be the other direction. Both are correct because as I said, it's just a standardization, not a restriction.

This is actually what you need to remember, because once you have assigned your x and z axis, the other one is just to use right hand rules to find out where is y. Because once you fix two of them, then you just use right hand rules to finally find the final axis, which is y.

I repeat again, look at all the joint axis of the joint, and then assign them as z. Then start to extend all the z axis. If they intersect, that will be the origin. Later on, we'll look at some cases where they do not intersect. After that, based on z, we assign x to be perpendicular to the current joint axis and the previous z axis. Again, there's a caveat behind. You can see that sometimes they are parallel, means they do not intersect. In this case, we have a rule, which we'll see later on when we go through another example. Finally, once you have selected z, once you have selected x, y is fixed by right hand rule.

And finally, when you reach the end effector frame, there's a separate rule. We will look at that later on because this example does not have an end effector. Just take note that when you reach the end effector, we'll assign it according to sliding, approach and the normal direction. But in this case, we just use a very simple example to illustrate the concept, and there's no end effector.

I'm explaining to you how to obtain this graph, which is called DH diagram. And you should go back to try to sketch it by yourself. If you cannot get it, you review the videos, and then you'll see the sequence more clearly.

Based on this diagram, we can derive four sets of kinematic parameters. Remember two joint parameters, two link parameters. Joint angle, joint distance, link length, link twist angle, four sets of parameters. Joint angle can now be formally defined as the angle between the x axis, with respect to z. Joint distance is the distance between x axis along the joint axis z. So this first two, your reference is z. And you look at the angle between x, and the distance between x. This is the joint parameters. While the next two are the reverse. You can see that you just replace z by x, x by z. And the link length will be the distance between z, with respect to x. Link twist angle is the angle between joint axis, with respect to x axis. This is a formal definition. Later on, I'll show you the physical meaning. That is easier to remember. Because for beginners, it's always difficult when you first look at this definition. What does it really mean? You need to go through the examples, then you understand the meaning as well as the physical meaning.

The next part is that based on this definition, I will derive the four sets of kinematic parameters, which is this table over here. Again, as I said, if you look at all the textbooks, you will just find this table there. This is because you are expected to try to derive it, so that you have a better understanding, especially when you are beginners.

Over here, four sets of kinematic parameters, but take note that only one is variable. Because there's only one motor at each joint. If you look at joint one, then you know that theta1 will be rotating. The others will be constant. Only one variable, the others will be constant. If it's a variable, you'll just put theta1. You don't have to figure out what is the angle. In this case, just for information, theta1 is the angle between x0 and x1, with respect to z0. You can see that at this configuration, your angle is equal to zero. That means that if you sketch it out, the angle between x is currently equal to zero. But let me stress this, do not put zero there because you are deriving the forward kinematics model and you sketch it out at this configuration, which happened that theta1 is equal to zero. If you put theta1 equal to zero, then you cannot derive the forward kinematics model because forward kinematics model says that given any joint angle, say theta1, theta2, and so on, you need to find the positions and orientations of the end effector. Which means that you must derive a model with any theta so that you can use it to calculate. If you put theta1 equal to zero, you are only deriving the position and orientation at the particular configuration. Always put the joint angle as a variable. But if you want, you can just put zero in bracket. That means that currently it's equal to zero.

If you look from the top of this robot, top view, you will see this x and y. This is x, this is y. Now, suppose that the joint one received some signal from your computer, and start to rotate. Joint one will rotate, and because we assign upward, this z axis is pointing towards you. Imagine you look from the top down, the z axis will be pointing towards you. If you put right hand rules here, that will be positive direction. Because it's pointing upwards. This basically means that any rotation, suppose that the motor start to rotate. This will be your joint angle, joint angle one. It is rotating with respect to a fixed frame because there will be a base frame, which is always fixed. x0 here, y0 is always here. On top, you will see another x. We call x1. x1 will move together with your link. That means as the motor is rotating, you'll move link one, as a result, the direction of link indicated by x1 will change. As a result, there will be an angle between them.

This is how it looks like. Let me show you the actual robot over here. This is joint one. Imagine that there is a base frame which is fixed below it. It does not rotate. If this is x axis, and as for the x1, it is actually rotating when the joint is rotating. You can see that the second link is rotating. The angle between the link and your base frame x axis will be the joint angle. This is the meaning of this definition.

The next kinematic parameter, in fact the joint parameters, is called the joint distance. Joint distance is the distance between the x axis. x0 and x1. If you look at this figure over here, x0 is here, x1 is here, and that is a displacement of d. Actually, the joint distance is this physical distance. Maybe you can go to the actual robot and measure, ten CM. Then you'll put 10 cm. Usually when we derive the kinematics models, we don't use a specific number. Usually we'll put d. Why is it so? Because as far as the robot manufacturing company is concerned, they will not just make one robot. They will make a family of robots. So it can be 20 CM, some can be 30 CM, some can be 50 CM, the same kinematic structures but different sizes. In this case, we should derive a more general kinematics model so that as and when we want to make different sizes, we just plug different kinematic parameters into it. Usually, if you look at the textbook, you'll see that it will be something which can change. But in some cases, it will be fixed. For example, the next two, you can see that we do not put any variable there because it is always fixed in this case.

Why is it so? Now we are looking at the link parameters. Link parameters will be the relation between z, with respect to x, the other way round. Just now was the relation between x with respect to z, so now is the other way round. We can first see the distance between z0 and z1. Take note there's a reference, with respect to x1, and it is actually equal to zero. If you look at it carefully, z0, I mark it in red, z1, also marked in red. The reference is your x0, x axis over here. That means that they are all on this line. If z0 is here, z1 is here, then there's a displacement between them, but they are all on the same line, along the x axis, in fact. Therefore, the link length in this case is equal to zero.

Link twist angle will be the angle of these two rotational axis. Firstly, maybe I just reproduce it here. This is z0, and this is z1. Remember, z1 means that it is pointing into the whiteboard, and therefore, it is 90 degree. You see this 90 degree here, pi over two. But there is a sign. This sign is determined by x1. The reference is x1. x1 is here, and if you draw x1 here, then you can determine the sign. Because according to the right hand rules, my thumb is my x1. If I rotate z0 to z1, it is against this direction. That means that if you put your thumb, for now your x1 is a reference, which is your thumb, and the positive direction will be this direction. However, z0 towards z1 is the other way round, so it becomes negative. You must use right hand rules to determine the sign. Therefore, we have a negative sign there.

So I say again, 90 degree is clear. Sign, determined by the reference. In this case, is x1. And we use right hand rule.

Now, it is quite hard to remember all this definition, which one with respect to which one. But if you understand the physical meaning, then it will be very easy to derive it. Here I show you the physical meaning. Actually, this kinematic parameters tells you the relationship of this mobile frame with respect to the fixed frame, which is what we studied last week. There will be rotation and translation, and the four sets of kinematic parameters tells you how your coordinates. You must imagine that initially they are together. How this mobile frame, which is initially here, move to this location. I say again, you must imagine that there are two frames, one mobile frame, one fixed frame. Initially, they are coincide together. Then you start to visualize how this mobile frame will move to this location. And from there, you'll be able to figure out the relationship between them. How does it move from your fixed frame to the final position will tells you the relationship between the mobile frame with respect to the fixed frame.

In fact, here, I put this way. Align x first, then align z. That means that we look at how the frames are rotated, translated, to align x, then finally align z to move to this location.

Let us look at the detail. Just amplify this figure over here, and we have two frames initially coincide. You must imagine that together x1, y1, z1, initially, they are all at the base frame. I want to visualize how you move to the upper frame indicated by the DH diagram. Firstly, you can see that x is aligned. This means theta is equal to zero. But don't put theta equal to zero. Because as this angle rotate, just now I show it to you. This one naturally will rotate, that form the joint angle. Do not put it as zero. Otherwise, you can't get the kinematics model.

We can see that there's a displacement between these two x. Along the z axis. There's a displacement between them. In fact, here, this is what happened. You will have to move upward. That means that initially they are coincide. And it has to translate along the direction of z to that location. Now, this is your location, but this is the target location. z must be pointing into the whiteboard. You still have some more operations. In this case, you need to align z now because you have already aligned x. Initially, it was here. Then you moved. x is now aligned. But z is not aligned yet. This is your mobile frame, and you want to rotate it downward in order to align. And at this stage, you can see that the origin are now the same. Therefore, there's no more translation. You do not need to translate to align the z. There's a translation of zero. If your target is here, that means that if z is here instead of here, then you still need to translate. But in this case, it's no more translation. You only need to rotate.

At this stage, take note that your x is already the same. So you change to x1 now, because they are the same. And finally, you rotate. All this is with respect to the mobile axis. You rotate by joint angle, translate by joint distance, translate by link length, rotate by link twist angle to move from the base frame to the final location. The final one is to indicate, using right hand rules, we know that this direction will be positive. This is 90 degree. No problem, but there's a direction. This direction will be positive, but now we want to rotate the other way round. In order to rotate, you must flip the arrows, which is now pointing into the whiteboard, which is 90 degree. And it is against right hand rule, which means that the final one, you just flip it this way and it's against the right hand rule because this is your reference now, x1. This will be this direction, but we are rotating the other way around, so it's negative. This explain this negative angle because it's 90 degree and it's against the direction assigned by right hand rule with x as my reference.

This is a physical meaning, that means that if you can't remember the definition, you just imagine two frames initially coincide. How you move to this location, by first align x, then align z. From there, you also understand that this four sets of kinematics parameters actually tells you the relationship between the coordinate frame. How this coordinate frame is related to this frame after a sequence of rotation and translation. You go in this sequence, rotate, translate, translate, rotate, with respect to the mobile axis.

Okay, we will look at one more example. Over here, we have a more complete robot. Just now I only show you here actually. Most of the structures are the same. Sometimes you'll see different housing, but they are mostly the same. In the sense that the base will have this rotational axis. Then here you have another two joints. It can be in different configuration, but usually the first two joints will be quite similar. Then the first three joints will be the major axis, because when you move the first three joints, you can figure out the workspace in the three dimensional space. The remaining joint, when we say remaining joint, because it can be, for example, two, in this case, one and two. It can be three. It can be more than that. Here, we only have two minor, three major. Altogether, five degrees of freedom. Which means that you may not be able to orientate the end effector in some directions, not any direction in three dimensional space. But all this is depending on your applications. Suppose that in some applications, you do not need six degrees of freedom, you can buy robots with lesser degrees of freedom because it's always cheaper.

I'll show you roughly how this looks like. Let's go back to this robot again. First joint. You can see that as I rotate the first three joint, my end effector move drastically. Second joint. We've seen this also just now, the second joint. Now, this is variable. You do not put a constant in your DH table. This is variable, and this is third joint. Even though there is a hydraulic actuator there, but the joint axis is still here. This is the next joint axis. As you can see, as I rotate joint one, two, three, my end effector move drastically. But the remaining joints, there are only two axis. I think it is this one, and the last one. This robot is short of one joint. You cannot achieve any orientation.

Now, the joints are variables and you want to sketch it in the two dimensional space. DH diagram is two dimensional. This basically means that you have to visualize a little bit some of the coordinate assignments. That's the first thing. Second thing is to take note that your joint angles is a variable. When you sketch it, of course, you have to fix it. Can't sketch moving robots on the paper. Basically, what we do is that we fix at one configuration. The drawing you will see that we will fix in this way. But take note, you can draw a different way. That means that you may want to draw this way, also can, or vertically upwards, you may want to draw two upwards and then one downward. As long as the joint is there, you're free to rotate it. If there's no joint there, do not rotate it. For example, this link is fixed configuration. You can't rotate it.

Go back to this one. You can see the relationship clearly with the animations where we have basically one joint, first joint to rotate the base. Then we have another joint, we call the shoulder, rotate this. This is the third joint. The remaining two just to orientate the end effector, where we have a pitch and roll only. We do not have the yaw in this case for this particular robot. Altogether, five axis.

Now again, this is what you should try to sketch. How do we sketch using DH algorithm or DH representation, or DH assignment. I start by identify all the joint axis, which means that you should identify all the joint axis. These are the joint axis. Then sketch your z at the actual joint axes. This is how it works. You can see that all the z axis are marked by red one. We'll go through the DH algorithm one by one, starting from the base.

Now, DH algorithm says that if you are at the base, assign z as the axis of joint one. Which means that you go to the actual robot again and see how it is rotated. That means what your z axis will be pointing upward or downward. As I mentioned just now, in this case, even though we have the freedom to choose upward or downward, we should choose upward so that everything above the base will be considered as positive z coordinates. Otherwise, you deal with negative z. This is the first assignment. x and y, up to you. Imagine that you have this robot. All it says is that let's assign z, and x and y up to you. For example, maybe the company want to call this x. Go ahead. Another company want to call this x is also fine. So long as you assign properly, put into the diagram. Subsequently, everybody will be able to refer to it.

This is how we assign the base frame. Now, base frame will be our reference frame. Very important coordinate, the reference frame, in which all the commands of the robots are issued. It will be with respect to the base frame. That means that where is the object? Where's the top of the table, with respect to the base frame, that means z is equal to one, where's the location with respect to x, where's the location with respect to y? That would be the reference. And it speaks with respect to the base.

Now, we have then selected x in this direction. But if you want to put this way, also can. Or even any direction. So long as you identify it and fix it, mark it down so that subsequently everybody will be able to use it. This course teach you from the perspective of a robotics engineer, not a user. User is programming, factory operator can also program. I've offered you an optional course. If you're interested, you can go and try out the robot programming, just sign up following the link. You can actually learn how to program it, but different company will have a different programming language actually.

Next, we move on to the next joint. Maybe we go back to compare again. This is the next joint. From this joint one, I put it at this configuration. This is my joint two. I put it in a configuration so that it's easier to sketch. This basically means that my second joint axis is either pointing out or pointing inwards of the whiteboard. You must imagine this is two dimensional, it is rotating here. It's either pointing towards or away from you. It's rotating this way. Which means two choices again. z1 can be this way, or the other way round. Both are fine. There is some flexibility in this. I'll follow the textbook, pointing inwards.

This is the next step. The joint axis of joint two is selected as the z axis of the next frame. Base frame is zero, next frame is one. After that, we extend both z axis, and see where they intersect. They intersect here. Therefore, that will be the origin of the next frame. This is what DH algorithm says. After that, based on this origin, you start to sketch x and y. x is a vector which is perpendicular to z. You may want to sketch it here if you are confused. This is z0, this is z1. Therefore, your x can be this way or the other way. Both are perpendicular to both. That means that again, you have two choices to fix your x. I will choose this direction. But I stress again, if you choose the other way round, it's also fine. After you have fixed x, y is unique because you must borrow right hand rule. x rotate towards y gives you z. This is how the y axis is assigned.

In fact, so far what I've done is similar to the previous example, exactly the same. Usually, most of the robots will have this very common configuration for the first two joints.

If you move on to the next joint, you'll see that it's actually parallel to the previous joint. Suppose that you look at this joint. I use a different robot but they have similar structure as you can see. This is my joint axis. That means that even though it's actuated by something else, this is my joint axis. Joint axis is where your joint is rotating. Don't be confused by the hydraulic actuator. This is still your joint axis, which means that it is pointing towards you or away from you. Again, over here, you have two choices. You can either choose z2 to be away from or pointing towards you. But however, previously, you have chosen z1 in the same direction, which is pointing inwards. Perhaps you should follow, so as to simplify your kinematic parameters, because if z are parallel, it means your link twist angle will be equal to zero. If you point the other direction, your link twist angle will be 180 degree. It's up to you, but usually we can assign it in a certain way which make our kinematic parameters simpler. Later on, we'll see that your link twist angle will be equal to zero because the angle between the z axis is the link twist angle.

Now, this is where there's a problem now. Because if you extend these two z axis, they do not intersect because they are parallel. The first statement of the second step over here is not valid anymore. You cannot select the intersection of the z axis. This is where there's a caveat behind. If they do not intersect, then use the intersection of the current z with a common normal between the z axis. Actually if you go back to here, you will see a common normal which is the blue line. Why is it called a common normal? Because it is perpendicular to z1 and z2. That means that z1 is pointing inwards, z2 is pointing inwards. If you draw this line, it will be also perpendicular to both. This common normal becomes a reference. The intersection of this common normal with your current z axis will be selected as the origin. If you go back to here, the intersection of this with this will be selected as the origin of the next frame. This is what the next caveat is about.

Finally, we also see that you need to select x to be perpendicular to the z. Now, common normal is perpendicular to both. That's why it's called common normal. But there is one more caveat. It says that in this case, just point the x away from the previous joint. This basically means that here you should point to this way. Do not point the other way around. Because your previous joint is here, you point away from the previous joint along the common normal. Why along the common normal? Because x is always perpendicular to z. Common normal is perpendicular to z1 and z2. That's why it's called common normal. Lastly, y come out naturally from right hand rule after we have fixed x and z.

If you move on to the next joint, actually it is similar to the previous joint. This is how it is rotated. Let me align this first so that it's easier to see. If this is the joint, you can see that it's also the same for this particular robot, which means similar. In fact, if you see this similar structures, after a while, if you're confident, you just draw up the same thing. You can see that they are parallel, everything is the same. Because z2 and z3 do not intersect, you put a common normal. Intersection of common normal with z is the origin of the next frame. Then x3 will be along the common normal pointing away from the previous joint. We get this next coordinate.

Now, the next one is a bit tricky. Let us look at this by aligning it properly first. The last joint is this one. You can see that the gripper is rotating because you want to align the gripper so that you can orientate it to pick up a part. This needs some rotational angle over here. Now, where is your rotational axis? This one. This is your rotational axis. Observe again, rotate with respect to the axis in the approach direction actually. This is the approach direction. This is your rotational axis. If you come back to here again, you'll see that the z axis of the next joint should be here. z4. Because it's rotating this way. z4 actually should be here. That means that if you draw it over here, this will be z4. Then if you intersect it with this one, the origin should be here.

I say again, for example, if it's here, z4, and the previous z axis is here, z3. If you intersect them, they have the same origin. In some cases, they may have the same origin. But when this happened, suppose that you keep drawing your diagram, same coordinates, overlapping. You can see that you will be very confusing. Sometimes you'll see this dash line. It means that they have the same origin. But however, for clarity of presentation, let's move it out. That is easier to see the assignment. But we indicate a dash line, not a solid line so that we know that this origin is supposed to be here, but we just draw it at a certain distance away, so that is easier for user to see.

This is my next sketching. I'll draw z here, but actually is here. Then I can assign x because this is z3, and this is z4. They are at the same origin, but sketched here, and to assign x, it has to be either upward or downward. That is perpendicular to both. Here, I will assign upward, but downward is also fine. Actually, they are together, but you sketch it here with the dash line, indicating that they should have the same origin. That means that there's no translation here, only rotation. Some of the translation parameters you see later will be equal to zero because there's no translation, only rotation.

Remember, there are four transformations. Rotate by the joint angle, translate along the joint distance, then translate along the link length, then rotate by link twist angle. Some of the parameters is zero, in this case, no translation, only rotation. We draw x upwards and y comes up naturally from right hand rules.

Finally, when you reach the end effector frame, then there is this caveat here. Watch out for this caveat. It says that once you reach the end effector frame, you should assign z as the approach vector, y as the sliding vector, and x will be fixed after you have assigned the approach vector and the sliding vector. Here at end effector frame, we assign according to the physical meaning. Approach direction of the end effector, opening and closing direction of the gripper, and lastly, x is perpendicular to both. Watch out for this caveat and proceed to assign the last frame, which is over here. This is my approach direction. That will be z. Sketch your end effector, opening and closing direction, so you have two choices, this way or this way. If you sketch your end effector this way, then this will be your approach. This or the other way round will be your sliding. This frame will be rotated together with the gripper. As it is rotating, you can see that the sliding direction will change.

This is how we assign the coordinate, starting from the base frame, all the way until the end effector frame. Now, as I said, do not just read it, you have to try to sketch it. That means start from a blank piece of paper. Slowly assign one by one, to see whether you can get something similar. When I say similar, is because it's not unique. Some can be one direction. The other one could be opposite direction. Usually, your answers will differ by a plus minus sign sometimes.

Based on this DH diagram, again, we'll be able to derive four sets of kinematics parameters. In the earlier examples, based on this two, we derive this first set. Then you just move on. Based on this two, you can derive the second set. Move on to this and this and this will be fourth. Finally, this with respect to this will be the fifth one. You just look at the relationship from one coordinate to another. The idea is this, suppose that this one is initially here, how you move to here. Next, suppose that this one was initially here. Imagine how you move to this location. And similarly, this has to move to this location. Here, it has to rotate to this configuration. There's no translation. Finally, this one is supposed to be here and how it moved to this location will tells you the relationship between each joint and the link. All these need to do it carefully.

I'll show you one by one for these examples, and as I said, do go back to try it by yourself. The first one is the same as the previous example. We'll skip this one and move on to the second one. The second one actually tells you the relationship between these two coordinate frame. Firstly, if you have a variable theta2, put theta2 here. Do not put theta2 equal to zero. Because theta is the angle between x1 and x2, with respect to z axis. And they are equal to zero at this stage. Actually, you can imagine that if this rotated, then the second link will be rotated. This is your x1, this is x2, then you'll start to form an angle, which is theta2. Which one is positive, which one is negative, defined by your z. z0 inwards. Right hand rule says that this direction will be positive. The other direction will be negative angle. This give you the sign. But do not put zero. If you want, you can put theta2 with zero in bracket, but don't just put zero. Once you put zero, it's wrong because you're not modeling the forward kinematics anymore. You're just looking at a particular configuration.

Next, the x axis. There's no translation needed with respect to z because they are on this whiteboard, and translation along z is into the whiteboard is positive, but they are on the same two dimensional plane. There's no translation. Therefore, you get zero here. This explain why this zero is here because there's no translation of x along z.

Next, there's a translation of z with respect to x. Because z1 is here, z2 is here. There is a distance between them, that's called the link length. Here, we put a2, because as I said, usually, the company will put the variable in the sense that there will be different model. One maybe a2 equal to ten CM. The other one maybe 50 CM, different sizes, but same kinematic structures. This enable the company to come out with different kinematic model easily just by substituting with different parameters. But for some cases, they are constant. For instance, the link twist angle is constant. You cannot change it. It's fixed in the sense that this joint axis and this joint axis, they are parallel. If they are parallel, there's no angle between them. Angle is equal to zero, and therefore, you have a link twist angle of zero. This is based on definition.

As I said, the other way is to imagine that two frames initially coincide. This frame will move to this location. Over here, you can see that there's only one translation required. Just translate here, which is this one. There's no rotation because these two are parallel, you just need to translate.

Now, once you get this one, the next one is the same. This with respect to this is similar to this with respect to this. The only difference is that this two length may be different. In a sense that we may not want to make a2 equal to a3. We may want it to have a different link length. You can just copy down, similar to the previous one. In fact, it's just a translation to align it from one frame to another.

The next one is even easier because remember, I say that if there's a dash line, it means that no translation. You put the translation to zero. Then the variable, no need to think, put a variable there, theta4. The only thing that you need to figure out will be the link twist angle. Link twist angle will be the angle between the two z axis marked by red, with respect to the current x axis. I sketch it over here so that it's easier to see. This is my z3, this one into the whiteboard z4. And they have the same origin. You have to imagine that this z4 is actually here. So they have the same origin, and my x4 is perpendicular to both. Now, the link twist angle is the angle between these two, which is 90 degree. They are perpendicular, you put pi over two, 90 degree. Next, you must determine the sign, because the z axis should move from this to this in order to move to the final configuration. That means that initially they coincide, how z3 will move to z4. It must rotate by pi over two. According to the right hand rules, if this is your reference, then this direction will be positive, but it is the other way round. We put the negative. This explain why we have a negative sign over here because it's this way, right hand rule is this way, is the other way. Therefore, put a negative sign there and that gives us the link twist angle.

Last one, for the joint five is the relationship between this one, which is actually here, and this one. You must actually imagine that it is here. This is your x4, and this is your z4. But you can see that if I sketch it here, basically, it completely overlap with the previous one, x, y, z three, and you will mess up your drawing. Usually you sketch it out, so that it is easier to see the relationship between them. Here, I put it back there to let you understand that it's actually there. Then you need to translate to this location. And this basically is this d5 here. What is d5? d5 is here. In order to align x, look at the point x4 to x5, I need to translate along z, along the own axis, the mobile frame. After that, do you need to do anything? No more. No more translation because I've reached this location. And I don't even need to rotate because x4 is x4 and x5 are parallel, z4 and z5 are also parallel. This explain the last two. No translation, no rotation.

You just try to imagine two frame initially coincide. How you move from one location to another by align x followed by align z. That will give you the four sets of kinematics parameters. And for the joint angle, no need to think, just put a variable. The others are constant. Actually, for example, this 0.1. This is 0.2, and this one could be 0.2, this one could be 0.3. The others are constant. But as I mentioned, usually, because the company want to make different models with different sizes, but same kinematic structures, they will put something like d1, d2, a2, a3 so that they can just substitute with different dimensions into it to derive different kinematics model.

I urge everyone to try to do it. Don't just read because this one requires a lot of practice in order to understand it. But basically, you can see that after you do it a few times, it's actually not that difficult to remember. All the z axis are the joint axis. Except the last one, it will be the approach direction. That means that physically, if you have a robot, you want to model the forward kinematics. You will see how the joints are rotated and label them as z. After that, you start to extend your z. Where they intersect will be the origin of the next frame, x will be perpendicular to both of the z. y comes out naturally from right hand rules.

In some cases, your z will not intersect. Then in this case, do a common normal. The intersection of the common normal with this z will be the origin of the next frame. Common normal means perpendicular to both. x will be along the common normal, but DH algorithm suggests that point x away from the previous joint. That means don't point backwards. Your joint is here, don't point backwards, point away from the previous joint. If you see the same structures, don't need to think, just repeat it.

In some cases, when you try to extend the z axis, they may intersect at the same point. In this case means no translation, purely rotation. But if you draw them together, it's quite confusing. Therefore, for clarity of presentation, let's put a dash line there indicating that the origins are the same and extend it out so that it is easier to understand.

Once you reach the end effector frame, we call two frame. This rule doesn't apply anymore. We follow the physical meaning. Assign z by the approach direction. Approach can only have one direction. Backwards is not the approach direction. Sliding direction has two choices. It can be this or this. Opening and closing directions of the gripper, two direction. Once you fix two of them, the other one must follow right hand rule. You also need to review your right hand rule. As I said, try to practice it.

And I think it's time to take a break. Now it's 8:05. Please come back at 8:20.

Okay, class, welcome back. We will continue on the lectures on how to derive a forward kinematics model so that using that model, given any joint angles, for example, joint angle one equal to a certain angle, you will be able to predict the exact position and orientation of this end effector by using that model. And we do that by sketching the DH diagram, which is to identify all the joint axis of the robot system.

Here, just take note that because this is obviously a three dimensional motion, this is the joint angle, where you can rotate it in a three dimensional space. Now, when you sketch the DH diagram, you will draw it at a particular configuration. For example, joint two, you may want to draw it at this angle, nothing stop you from drawing at this angle. Usually, we draw 90 degree because it's easier to see, but after a while, if you're familiar, you can even draw it this way, at a certain configuration. That means that you actually draw it at a particular configuration, namely, I'm drawing it at a configuration where the joint angle is of certain value. In this case, if you put zero, it is here. If you put 90 degree, it will be downward. If you put 180 degree, then it is this side, and so on. So basically, I'm drawing it at a particular joint configuration. Because obviously in our paper, you cannot draw a moving robot unlike this animation. The trick is that when there's a joint, you can sketch it as you wish provided that you satisfied the joint constraint. In this case, just now we draw it this way. But nothing stop you to draw upwards. Later on, I'll provide an example in the next example where you can draw upward. In fact, the next one if you want to draw upward, it's also fine. But usually, you may run out of space. Over here, you can see if you want to continue outward, it's also fine, or you may want to turn it the other side, so that is easier to see your diagram. Take note that if there is a joint, you can rotate it in your DH diagram.

Some students after a while, they can draw it directly on the original schematic. Given a robot schematic, they can just sketch it very easily. That's only after a while where you have a better understanding. So at the first time, when you look at this diagram, it's always confusing. But you should review it, sketch it yourself. So that you can get a better understanding. In the later week, I'll also release some exercises for you to practice. But the examples in the notes is also a way for you to try to practice because the answer is there and you can watch the video to see how it is sketched up.

Now, after you have assigned all the coordinates by DH algorithm, you can now try to derive the forward kinematics of the robot system, which is to find out how this two frame is related to the base frame. There are two things here, one will be the rotation, one will be the translation. Robot is a complex mechanism. You can't find the relationship between the two frame and the base frame directly. In fact, that's the purpose of assigning all these coordinate so that you can find the relationship from one to another. For example, if I find the transformation of the base frame and the first frame, the first frame with respect to the base frame, if I can find this transformation, and if I can find this transformation of the second frame with respect to the first frame, then this will be the transformation of the second frame. Third frame with respect to second frame. This dash line, be careful, it means that they are together, same origin. If you try to draw them together, you'll see that it's extremely confusing. That's why for clarity of presentation, we just draw it at a different location. But the dash line indicating that the origins are the same. There's this transformation with only rotation. In this case, will be 3 to 4. Then after that will be 4 to 5.

By multiplying all these transformation matrices together, imagine that you have all of them, and if you multiply them, you get a composite transformation matrix of frame five with respect to zero. Because zero is a base frame. This robot only have five joints, the fifth joint will be the end effector frame. That basically means that you get the relationship of the two frame with respect to the base frame.

I'm giving an overview of what we going to learn, in the second part of the lectures. First part of the lectures today, assign the coordinates according to DH representation. Next, we need to find out the relationship between each of the coordinates, which means the rotation and the translation between them. Just now, indeed, I have shown you that there are four types of transformation involved. Rotate the joint angle, translate by the joint distance, translate along the link length, and then rotate by the link twist angle. This altogether four. In fact, it explain the physical meaning of your kinematics parameters. Imagine two coordinates initially coincide, how the mobile frame will move to the next location. By doing so, it give you the relationship of the mobile frame with respect to the base frame.

Each of these two coordinates will have to go through four fundamental transformations: rotate, translate, translate, rotate. One way is that you write down all these four for every joint, you write down this four, and then you multiply them together, you get a composite matrix. But imagine every joint, you have to multiply four matrices together, which is not very effective. What people usually do is that they will derive a general transformation matrix from one frame to another. That means that instead of finding zero to one, one to two, two to three, three to four, four to five by multiplying four matrices in each transformation, we find a general one from k minus one to k, in terms of the general kinematics parameters, theta_k, d_k, and then the link length, and then link twist angle. Joint angle, joint distance, link length, link twist angle. From there, you'll be able to then substitute some specific kinematics parameters into it to derive the particular one. This is more effective in the sense that you multiply these four matrices together one time. Rotate, translate, translate, rotate, multiply them together one time. Subsequently, we just substitute the parameters. This is the idea of the subsequent lecture.

Firstly, the first transformation is a rotation to align x. Remember, you want to align x, by rotate with respect to the joint axis, by a joint angle. Here I'll show you the meaning over here. Where we have one joint. Imagine there's a motor here. This motor will move the next link, joint k move link k. As link k move, there's an angle with respect to the previous x, that is called joint angle. And joint angle is equal to zero when your link align. You can see that when the link x_k is parallel, pointing in the same direction as k minus one, the joint angle is equal to zero. When we sketch it, we will sketch it at theta equal to zero, 90 degrees, 180 degrees, 270 degree, why? Because easier to see in the two dimension space. But as I said, if you are familiar enough, you can draw any configuration. As a beginner, you always draw 90 degree, so that is easier to differentiate them.

Now here, you need to rotate this x axis, x_{k-1}, rotate by the joint angle. If you rotate with respect to the joint axis by the joint angle, then you can see that the x_k are now parallel. This means theta is equal to zero. After you align them, sometimes there will be a joint distance. That means that it's here, you have to move upward, and here you can see that there's translation along the joint axis by a joint distance. Rotate, translate, two operation. This is with respect to the joint parameters.

And there are also one link connecting two joints. That define your link parameters. Basically means that if you have a motor here, and in between, basically, there's a link. The link twist angle, as you can see, is how your rotational axis of current joint is related to the previous one, with respect to the x axis. Over here, we can see that firstly, I can translate along the link length. It is originally here, I translate to this location. After that, my z can now be rotated by a certain angle, that is your link twist angle, in order to reach this location. Basically is to rotate, translate, translate, rotate. That means that imagine that two frames initially coincide, how it move to the target location. That tells you the relationship between the mobile frame with respect to the fixed frame.

But however, you can see that if you do this joint by joint, then you need to do matrix multiplication every time. This is not so effective. What we will do here is that we will derive a very general transformation matrix from previous joint to the next joint. Current joint is this with respect to the previous joint. We derive a general one so that we can refer to it as a formula. This will be the formula where we will refer to it for formulating the transformation matrices based on the DH diagram.

So I'll show you how to derive this, even though it's not required, and I have uploaded it in NTU Learn. If you're interested, you can go and take a look. Remember that there are four operations, rotate, translate, translate, rotate. Let's go back to last week, three fundamental rotations, one fundamental translation. If you look at this carefully, it says that you're rotating with respect to the z, and translate along z. x, y, z means 1, 2, 3. First axis, second axis, third axis, that means R1, R2, R3, which you have learned last week. Rotation about first axis is x. Rotation about second axis is y. Rotation about third axis is z. If you rotate about the first axis, it's very clear, x will not change. If you rotate about y, then y will not change. This means no change. Rotate about z, then z will not change. If you have only rotation, no translation, this will be zero. If you have only translation and no rotation, then you'll be identity matrix. Identity matrix means I multiply by the vector, you'll give you the same vector. Multiply by a matrix, you'll give you the same matrix, means no change.

Here, we can then apply to this four fundamental rotation and translations. Because it is with respect to the mobile frame. Here you put an identity matrix first. Means what, initially coincide. They are initially together. Then the first operation is rotate. You do a post multiplication because it is with respect to the mobile frame. Rotate about the z axis. z axis is third axis, by the joint angle. Then translate about the z axis. By the way, this notation I3 means (0, 0, 1). It is a unit vector along the z direction. It is rotating about the z axis, and then translate along the z axis by d_k. Rotate, translate. After that, you change to x, x is first axis. Here you have I1. I1 means (1, 0, 0). This is first axis. I translate along x axis, first axis, by the link length, and rotate with respect to the first axis by link twist angle. Altogether four.

As I said, it makes no sense to multiply this four in every joint. What people do is that they will find out the general one. This is the general one. Firstly, rotate about third axis means z. You put R3 here, in the homogeneous coordinates, only rotation. After that, is a translation. Translate along the x axis. x axis is first axis, I1. Let's look at it again. These are the z is the third axis. This is with respect to the z, and this is with respect to the z. On z, that means that x equal to zero, and there's no rotation, only translation. We have model the rotations and translations, which is relating to the joint parameters.

The next operation is the translation. Now it is x, there's only translation, no rotation. Therefore, the rotation is identity matrix, and the translation is only along the x axis, not y not z. We only put this translate along the link length. No translation along y and z. This is how we represent the translation along the x axis. Finally, is the rotation with respect to x, with respect to x means R1. R1, and there's no translation.

Which means that we can write down the four matrices, which is how your mobile frame initially coincide. After a series of transformation will reach the target position, which is assigned by DH diagram. Here, basically, you just multiply in this order, post multiply, post multiply, post multiply. If you multiply them together and simplifying it, you can get this matrix. You can go back and try. If you can't derive it, nowadays, the large language model is very powerful. You can just cut and paste my slide and say that show me how to derive this in details. But if you're interested, you can try to derive it, but you're not expected to derive this. Here, I just show it to you how it was derived so that you will not be confused why you have this one. In fact, you read all the textbook, they will just provide you this. You should try to derive it. Secondly, you're not expected to memorize this also. Some students are quite amazing, they can memorize this exactly. But it's meaningless. If you memorize this, it's quite meaningless because there's no meaning. You just memorize something in a fixed pattern. We don't expect you to memorize it. If it's needed, you will be provided. As an engineer, if you need it, you refer to the textbook, look at this and see how we will use it. Here, we will just use it. But it was derived based on the physical meanings of the kinematics parameters. It tells you how the coordinates are related to one another in a general way. How the current coordinate is related to the previous one by the four sets of kinematics parameters, theta_k, d_k, and then the a_k, alpha_k. Joint angle, joint distance, link length, link twist angle. Later on, suppose that you need some particular configuration. Maybe theta1 is equal to 0.2, d1 is equal to 0.3, a1 is equal to zero, for example, you just plug it into this general one. Then you can easily get the particular one. This is the idea that we going to do.

Now, inverse, usually you don't need it. But this is again, just for your info. If you want to find the inverse, refer back to page 51 last lectures, where basically you need to partition it into this form. Then if you take the transpose of this, you'll see that this is this transpose. Remember transpose will be the inverse of the rotational matrix. As for the other one, this is your P. Here, this is actually negative R transpose P. Because it's rotated, therefore, you need to invert it and translate it back. Then you'll get this. This is just for your info.

The next one is for joint type. So far, I have only show you all revolute joint. But in some robots, you may have mixed joint type, that means some prismatic joints, some revolute joint. So suppose that you have prismatic joint, then your joint distance is the variable. Translation is the variable. Then your theta will become a constant. That's one problem here because if you use the notations, then there will be a confusion. Which one is constant, which one is joint variable. For example, if I put two joint, d1, theta1, a1, alpha1, d2, theta2, a2, alpha2. But first one is revolute joint. Second one is prismatic joint. At one glance, if you look at this, you can't tell which is revolute, which is prismatic. This cause some confusion in all this kinematics modeling. Usually what we do is we define something called q. Don't need to worry about all this. It just means that if this is revolute joint, then don't put theta1, put q1. If this is prismatic joint, then don't put d2, put q2. Then it is very clear that q1, q2 are variable. The others will be constant. This is just a more mathematical way to say what I have just mentioned. This is for mixed joint types sometimes, and even for the same joint type, you can also replace, some of them could be prismatic joint. It depends on your DH diagram.

As I mentioned just now, you can use the general one to obtain some particular one, zero to one, one to two, two to three, all the way until you reach the end effector frame. Then you multiply them together, that will give you the composite transformation matrix to give you the kinematics model. Sometimes, it may be useful, not necessary, but sometimes if you want, you partition it according to first three. First three is the major axis. You form the position x, y, z. The remaining one is called minor axis, it establishes the orientation. In any case, you multiply them together. This one means that you multiply the first three first and you multiply the remaining one. For example, in the previous example, the first three will be this zero to one, one to two, and then two to three. Minor will be just this one, three to four, and then four to five. That means that you do not have full degree of freedom. Your robot will not be able to perform some tasks.

After multiplying everything together, that means zero to one, one to two, two to three, three to four, four to five, for example, you get 5 to 0. That is the composite transformation matrix. What does it represent? You basically represent how your fifth frame is related to the base frame. Because it's in the homogeneous coordinates, include the translation information and the rotational information, as functions of the joint angle. That given joint one, joint two, three, four and five, we can calculate the translation of the end effector frame with respect to the base frame. That is what the position of the end effector. And from the rotational matrix, we can also calculate the orientation of the end effector with respect to the base frame. So take note, this is your reference. We want to see where is the position now, with respect to the reference along x, y, z. Where is the x position, where is the y position, where is the z position, and we want to predict it by the kinematics model so that given all the joint angle, I can use that model to instantly tell me where is this position. I can also use this model to calculate the orientation.

This is the overview, and then we can multiply them together to get this single transformation matrix. After you get this transformation matrix, is four by four, four by four because this is for rotation, and this is for translation and you complete the square by appending the last row of the identity matrix. But once you get the final matrix, you should partition into this form. And then this will be your translation. This will be your rotation. It tells you the position and orientation of the end effector frame with respect to the base frame, and if you have substituted the joint variable into it, you'll give you a general model. General model, that means here, you can see this variable, variable, q_n variable. Very often I see some students just put q1 equal to zero because you sketch at q1 equal to zero, but you should not put equal to zero. Otherwise, you're not modeling the forward kinematics model. You're modeling the position at this configuration which you sketch. You should put in the variable. That's why in the kinematics table, you always see that all the joint variables would not be constant value.

After you get this matrix, you partition into this form. As I said, it give you the physical meaning. Let me show it to you. This one is very easy to understand. P is this one. The translation is the position of the end effector. Now, the next one is a three by three matrix. This is R1, vector one, and this is R2, and this is R3. That means that you can actually partition the three by three matrix into three columns. Each of this column has a physical meaning as indicated in this diagram. In fact, you can see that this is R1, R2, R3. In particular, what is R3? R3 is the third column of your rotational transformation matrix, and the third column of your rotation transformation matrix is the z axis. z axis was assigned as the approach vector, DH algorithm. Approach vector, assigned as z. Which one is y, y is sliding direction. So you can see that the second column will be the sliding direction. Finally, the x axis will be R1. That means that when you obtain the rotation transformation, actually, this is your x_n, this is y_n, this is z_n, and this is approach, this is sliding, this is normal. There's a certain physical meaning to it.

Sorry, my handwriting is very bad. If you don't quite understand it, just do it this way. For example, R1. Say I'll put here r11, r21, r31. Now, I say that this is x. Why is it so? Suppose that you are here at the mobile frame. Imagine you are sitting at the mobile frame. You look at x, x will be one, zero, zero. Let's call it 1 with the rest zero. You can see that when you multiply this by this, you get a first column. This means that you are at the mobile frame, sitting at the mobile frame, you are looking at the x axis, the tip of the x axis, which is this one. Sitting here, looking at this, is always one, zero, zero. But someone at the fixed frame, assuming that there's no translation. Here, I'm only looking at rotation. Assuming there's no translation, someone looking at that tip, he will be this vector, which is the first column of your rotation and transformation matrix. The reason is clear. The rotation multiplied by the fixed multiplied by the mobile, you get the position with respect to the fixed. That means how this vector is oriented with respect to the fixed frame. That is a three dimensional vector. Similarly, if we multiply by (0, 1, 0), which is y, you get the second column. If you multiply by (0, 0, 1), you get the third column.

In short, it means what, this is R1, R2, R3, x, y and z. How is this pointed with respect to the base frame. How x, y, z of your end effector is pointed with respect to your base frame. From here, you can get the approach direction, from the third column of your rotational transformation matrix. Then you can command the robot to point in a certain direction. And you can get the sliding direction here to align your gripper with a flat surface of the object, so as to grab it. Here, all these allow you to command the robots now, not only to move to a position, but to orientate, your gripper pointing at a certain direction, and also rotate your gripper as to align with the flat surface. For example, I want to pick up this part, then I should approach here. Maybe I should align my gripper with this surface or this surface, depending on how you want to pick it up. That means that you align the approach vertically downward, and you align your gripper with the flat surface. Then you grab it. So from the kinematics models, we can predict all this.

Maybe we just look at one more example. Example 2.11 is actually the same example that we have derived the four sets of kinematics parameter just now. This is just some particular example where we will substitute the kinematics parameters that we have derived in 2.10 into this general transformation matrix, to derive the particular transformation matrix. This is just substitution. I'll just go through very quickly.

Now, put joint one first, starting from joint one. Joint one means I want to find out what's the relationship from the base frame to the first frame. If you refer to this example, that means just put k equal to one into it. k equal to one, you get one with respect to zero. Here you get cosine theta1, sine theta1. Next, this is your joint distance one. Follow by link length one and link twist angle one. This is for joint one. Then you check the table again. theta1 is a variable because this is your revolute joint. Now, here you can see that if you don't put d1, maybe some of you forgot, put zero because you draw at theta1 equal to zero. Then subsequently, you will not have a variable inside your transformation matrix. You have some constant value. And the objective of kinematic modeling is that given any theta1, you're going to find the position and orientation, not given theta1 equal to zero, given any theta1. This one must be a variable. Just leave it there. There's only one variable, the others will be constant. But this d1, we put it general here because sometimes d1 maybe ten CM. Another model will be 20 CM. Another model will be 50 CM. Same structures, different sizes, different dimensions. You just leave it as d1. But take note that it's not a variable. It's a constant. For this model is 20, for the other model is different. If you want a particular one just put maybe 0.2 meter or 20 CM, put it there.

After that, we take note that a1 is equal to zero, which means these two will be equal to zero. Finally, alpha1 is negative pi over two, that means negative 90 degree. By the way, I've uploaded this slide in NTU Learn, you can refer to it. I'm just teaching you one example, so that go back, you can try out for the rest. alpha1 is negative 90 degree. Over here, it means cosine negative 90 is zero, press calculator. Sine negative 90 is equal to negative one, just press calculator. Basically means that if you see cosine alpha1, it'll become zero. If you see sine alpha1, replace sine alpha1 by negative one. The top will become negative, and the bottom one, because there's a negative here, so it become positive. That means that you can see, I'm just substituting the particular kinematic parameters into the general one, rather than doing four transformations multiplication per joint. That means you rotate, translate, translate, and rotate to get 01. Then you do another time, rotate, translate, translate, rotate, for the next one. It's not effective to keep doing that repeatedly for each joint. What we did was that we derive a general one, then substitute the particular one into it to get each type of transformation.

We get the transformation matrix from base frame to the first frame. Similarly, you can do it for the others. This is the first one. Followed by the second one. Second one, you put k equal to two into the general one. That means that this is k minus one to k. You put k equal to two, you get one to two. Then you substitute all these parameters into it, it means theta2 is the general joint angle. d2 is equal to zero. Alpha2 is a family of robots, different dimensions, and alpha2. a2 is this different dimension. Alpha2 is equal to zero. This is the second one and the third one. If you compare the second and third, they are similar. Don't waste your time. Just do one. Then you can similarly derive the other one. cosine theta2 becomes cosine theta3, sine theta2 becomes sine theta3. Then a2 become a3. The rest will be the same, zero and one will be the same.

It is maybe sometime good to partition the multiplication. That means that you multiply the first three joints. That is the wrist with respect to base. The major axis. Suppose that you multiply these three matrices together and simplify it using trigonometry. You can check that it reduces to this single composite transformation matrix. This matrix actually tells you the position and orientation of the wrist with respect to the base, up to the wrist. The final one left only two because this robot has one degree of freedom less. Six is complete, but less than that, then you basically cannot achieve some orientation. But certain application is okay.

Finally, you put k equal to four, k equal to five, you get three to four, four to five. You can go back to try, substitute into this general transformation matrix to see whether you can get this particular one, and the minor axis will be the last two. Again, here we partition the multiplication. You multiply this three together. That is the major one. Then you multiply this two together. That is the minor. After multiplying the minor axis together, this is a frame with respect to three, that means the transformation of the end effector frame with respect to the wrist. Lastly, we will multiply the major axis and the minor axis. This is the minor. Previously, we have obtained the major axis. You just multiply this matrix with this matrix. You will be able to get this matrix. Of course, after some careful simplification. Nowadays with graphic tools and also large language model, actually, all these can be performed quite easily. But at this learning stage, you should learn how to multiply them manually.

This shows you the overview. We basically derive a general transformation matrix and use it to derive the individual transformation matrix, zero to one, one to two, two to three, three to four, four to five. Then we multiply them together to get a single transformation matrix of the end effector frame with respect to the base frame. Sometime you partition the multiplication, major and minor, but not necessary. You can just multiply them straight. No problem. Unless there's a specific purpose that you may want to change the minor axis. It makes sense that you partition it into here, so that if another robot you want to put full three degrees of freedom for orientation, then you just model that one, multiply with the same matrix for the major axis. Because maybe the company decided to have five degrees of freedom, six degrees of freedom, then you just change the last transformation matrix. This will save some time.

And finally, suppose that you derive the general one and suppose that one particular model at this dimension given here, then you just plug it into your general transformation matrix, and that will give you a particular transformation matrix, which is four by four. After you get this matrix, you should partition it into this form. And it has the physical meaning saying that this is the position of your end effector with respect to the base frame as functions of theta1, theta2, theta3, theta4, theta5. That given the joint angles, you can calculate the position now.

By the way, in this notes, if you see c2, it means cosine theta2. If you see c234 or c23, it means cosine (theta2 plus theta3). s234 is sine (theta2 plus theta3 plus theta4). All these are defined here. This is a short form because otherwise, the equations will be quite long.

Over here, you can see that this is x. This is y. This is z. Where are the x, y, z here? Base frame, x, y, and z. The functions of the joint angles, which means that for example, given some of the joint angles, you can calculate the x position. Given the joint angles, you can calculate the y position. Given the joint angles, I can also calculate the z position, which means that at a certain joint angle, what will be the x position, what will be the y position, and what will be the z position? All this can be predicted through all this kinematics modeling.

Next, orientation. Once you get the rotational transformation, now I show it to you, it can be partitioned into this form. And the first one is x, second one is y, third one is z. z will be this approach vector. y would be a sliding vector. x is the normal direction. That means that you retrieve this vector, it give you the direction of your approach vector. Given some of the angles, you can calculate where is it pointing, where is it approaching. Then given some of the angles, you can also use it to calculate where is the sliding, where is your gripper aligning in what direction now. The normal vector usually is redundant. Because if you want to grab something, you just approach and align the sliding direction. Approach, rotate your sliding direction, then you can grab. Some of the information is actually redundant. These three vectors actually is sufficient to command the robots.

I also upload this summary. Next week, we'll go through it in a complete picture, just to go through the steps and then you have a better understanding. So please go back to review it, so that next week when I go through again, you'll be able to understand it better.

I'll stop here today and see you next week. Thank you.
