Good evening, class. In week one, basically, we prepared you for the modeling of forward kinematics. And last week, we started to model the forward kinematics by using DH representations. I provided this summary on the NTU Learn site, so I have to summarize the steps for deriving the forward kinematics equation. Recall that the purpose of the forward kinematics model is to get the equation so that, given the joint angles of the robot, you can use the model to derive the positions and orientations of the end effector. At the end, you want to calculate the position as well as the orientation of the end effector as functions of all the joint variables, joint one, joint two, joint three, et cetera.

In order to do that, we first need to assign coordinates. If we leave it to individuals to assign the coordinates, you can see that everybody will come up with a different way of assigning. The DH algorithm is just a way to standardize it, standardize it so that all the robotics engineers will be able to understand how the coordinates are assigned and use it for the production or manufacturing of the robot. This is basically what the DH algorithm is about.

After you have assigned the coordinates using the DH algorithm, then you will use it to find the four sets of kinematic parameters, starting from the base all the way until the tool frame. This is the second step, and the four sets of kinematic parameters include two joint parameters and two link parameters. The four kinematic parameters basically tell you the relationship from one coordinate frame to another. For example, what is the transformation matrix from the base frame, which is frame zero, to the first frame. This is frame one with respect to zero. It involves four fundamental transformations: rotate, translate, translate, rotate.

It makes no sense to do matrix multiplications in every coordinate transformation from one frame to another. That means that from 0 to 1 you do four multiplications, from 1 to 2 you do another four multiplications. This is not so effective. Therefore, in robotics, we basically derive a general one. This is a general one for any four kinematic parameters. That means that given any joint angle, given any joint distance, given any link length, and given any link twist angle, you will be able to use it to calculate the transformation from one frame to another. As I explained last week, you need not memorize it. This is commonly available in all textbooks, and in terms of assessment or exams, this transformation matrix will be provided. However, you are expected to remember the DH algorithm and know how to define the kinematic parameters, because these are very fundamental.

After you have derived all the transformation matrices, all the way until the tool frame, then you can multiply them together. Starting from the base, multiply all the way until the last joint, which is the tool frame. Here, you will get one single transformation matrix of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. This is frame n with respect to zero, which is typically the tool frame with respect to the base. By doing so, you can get the forward kinematics model. We call it the arm equation.

This is just a remark, that sometimes it is useful to partition your multiplication into two parts. Your first three joints are the major axis. The remaining ones are basically relating to the orientation, the minor axis. Some robot companies may also make the first three joints similar, and then the last three joints slightly different. Some have a lesser degree of freedom, three degrees of freedom. So maybe there are two degrees of freedom for the minor axis, and some may have more. It makes sense that you calculate this transformation matrix of the major axis so that you can use it for all the subsequent models. This is a remark that sometimes it is useful to partition it into this form. Regardless of whether you partition or not, you have to multiply everything together eventually, because this will give you the forward kinematics model.

The final transformation matrix is the relationship of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. It means that if you have a mobile frame attached to the end effector, what is the relationship between this mobile frame and the base frame, which is a fixed frame. This is similar to what we studied in the first lecture: how do we get the transformation matrix of the mobile frame with respect to the fixed frame. The only difference is that this mobile frame is actually a function of the joint angles, which basically means that if joint angle one, two, three, four, five, six, and so on changes, the position of your mobile frame, which is this translation of the origin of the mobile frame with respect to the base frame, will change as a function of the joint angles. And at the same time, the orientation will also change. The orientation is described by a rotation matrix, because basically the rotation between the mobile frame and the base frame tells you the orientation. So this is basically the orientation of the tool frame with respect to the base frame.

This orientation matrix R, which you get by partitioning your final transformation matrix into this form, is actually this three by three matrix. Translation is this three by one vector. This is three by one; this is three by three. Because it is three by three, it can be put into three columns, one, two, three. If you have a three by three matrix, you can partition it into three vectors. The physical meaning of these three vectors is indicated here. This is basically R1, which is actually x. R2 is y, the sliding direction. R3 is actually z. Because when we assign the DH algorithm, remember that the last step is to assign the tool coordinate. Make sure that z is aligned with the approach direction. Make sure that y is aligned with the sliding direction, then x is the normal direction, which is perpendicular to y and z, and we assign it according to the right-hand rule. This is the physical meaning.

Which basically means that over here, we can now calculate the position of the end effector as a function of the joint angles. Given joint angles, calculate x, y, z. Where is the x position of the end effector? Where is the z position, and where is the y position with respect to the base frame? From there, we can then command the robot to move by using a controller so that you can position the end effector at a certain position. But position is not enough, because in order to pick up the part, you need to align the gripper with the part in order to pick it up. For example, if there is an object over here, you need to first approach it vertically downward. This means that you need to specify a direction in which the end effector should approach. Also, you need to align your gripper direction using R2 so that you can align properly with the flat surface. Then you can pick it up in a stable manner. Otherwise, if you pick it up at an arbitrary orientation, sometimes it may not be a very stable grasp.

This is basically what we have done last week, and we have gone through some examples. Today's lecture is to review again by providing more examples. I will have two examples. For the first example, the objective is just to go through the overall steps, not so much about the detailed math, but to go through the overall steps to see how we can combine everything together.

As I said, the first step is DH representation. DH representation says that you assign all the z axes, very easy to remember. Assign all the z axes first. How do you assign? The z axes are the joint axes. z-zero is the axis of the first joint, and you just move on to the next joint, z-one, and z-one is the axis of joint two. And you move all the way until the last joint. The first thing to remember is that z is the joint axis. After you have assigned all your joint axes, then you try to find the intersection between them. If they intersect, that will be the origin of your next frame. If they do not intersect, then there is a rule saying that you find a common normal between the joint axes, and after that, the intersection of the common normal with the current joint axis will be the origin. Based on z, you can also find the x axis, because the x axis is perpendicular to the z axis. Finally, after you have got your x and z, then y comes up naturally from the right-hand rule. This is what we discussed last week.

The other thing to take note of is that once you reach the end effector frame, then that rule does not apply anymore. You need to assign it according to the physical meaning of the end effector. Assign z as the approach direction, y as the sliding direction, then x is the normal direction. Once you have assigned the coordinate, then you can define the four sets of kinematic parameters. The first two sets are the joint parameters. You can see that it is quite systematic. The relationship of x with respect to z: one is angle, one is distance. Then you reverse it. Here it becomes z instead of x, and here, instead of z, it becomes x. It is reversed. And here you calculate the relationship between z with respect to x: one is distance, one is angle. There is also a physical meaning, which I went through last week.

As I said, we will go through two examples today. In the first example, we just want to go through the complete process to understand all the steps, not so much about the details, in the sense that here we assume that you already got the link coordinates. How do you get the link coordinates? Firstly, again, just to review, all the z axes are the joint axes. Here you can see D1, D2, D3, D4, and lastly D5. There are only five joints in this robot system. Next, take note that for the last frame, it does not follow this rule anymore. For the last frame, it is always: z is the approach vector, y is the sliding vector, and x is the normal vector.

After that, based on all the z axes, you start to identify the origin and the x axes. This is how we do it. Try to extend all the z axes and see where they intersect. When you assign z, you assign at the joint position. But after that, you extend and see where they intersect. If they intersect here, that will be the origin of the next frame. As for the base frame, it is always at the base. You just assign this one. x and y are up to you, so long as you satisfy the right-hand rule. So for the base, the only guideline is that you assign z-zero to be the rotation axis of joint one.

As I said, after that, we join z-zero and z-one. We know that the origin of the next frame should be here. From there, we assign x-two. x-two should be perpendicular to z-zero and z-one, 90 degrees, orthogonal. You have two choices. You can put it this way or this way. Both are fine. That means that if you and your friend want to check answers, typically you will see that sometimes you assign one direction and the other one may assign the other direction. Both are fine. This is not a restriction but a guideline. After that, you assign y according to the right-hand rule. You must be familiar with the right-hand rule.

Then after that, you move on to the next joint and try to extend them. Sometimes you see that they are parallel. If they are parallel, they will not intersect. In this case, you need to find a common normal between them. This is a common normal. That means that this line, the vertical line, is making 90 degrees with respect to both z axes, z-one and z-two. This is a common normal. Then you take the intersection of the common normal with the current z axis. That will be the origin of the next frame, which explains why this origin is here. After that, x. Remember, x should always be perpendicular to the z axis, correct? The common normal is perpendicular to both. Therefore, your x axis will be along here, and the DH algorithm says that you point x away from the previous joint. Point it in the opposite direction of the previous joint. This explains how we get this x-two.

Now, by the way, when there is a joint angle, you can draw it at any configuration. Here you have theta one, theta two, and theta three. Let me just show you how it looks again. This is actually theta one, and this is actually theta two. I can put theta two in this direction, correct? Maybe if I put zero, it is in this direction. But if you put 90 degrees, then it is up. You can also put 270 degrees. Let me do it again. This is a robot. This is joint one, and this is joint two. Now, when you draw the DH diagram, if there is a joint, be careful, only if there is a joint, then you can draw at any configuration. For example, you want to draw at theta two equal to zero. Then this will be the configuration. If you want to draw at theta two equal to 90 degrees, then it will be vertically upward. If you want to draw it at 270 degrees, then it will be downwards, or 180 degrees, then you will point to the other direction. This is because there is a joint. If there is a joint, you can draw it in any direction, for example zero degrees, 90 degrees. Same thing for the other joint, this joint over here. You can draw it at this configuration. You can also draw it at this configuration. So it is up to you. So long as there is a joint, you can just rotate it to any angle as you wish, so as to draw it.

For this robot over here, take note that in this case, the first three joints actually can be rotated in a similar way. In fact, this is the first three joints. We draw it vertically upwards, in the sense that here there is a joint, D2, which can rotate. Just now I showed it to you: you can rotate left or right by rotating theta two. Now, you can also rotate this way and draw it this way. This is the same as last week's example. In fact, for this robot, the first three joints are the same as Example 2.10, but here we sketch it in another configuration, just to let you know that you need not always sketch it in that fixed manner, so long as there is a joint angle. I say again, if there is a joint two there, you can rotate it. Rotate, sketch it this way; this was last week. This week we sketch it upward, and everything will be the same, because we are just drawing the diagram at a particular configuration.

One thing to take note of is that for this robot, here there is a fixed 90 degrees. Fixed 90 degrees; you can see that there is no joint. This is a joint, and this is a joint. For this one, there is no z here to rotate it. Therefore, this one you must draw in this manner. You can see that this joint is 90 degrees fixed. You cannot rotate it. This one you can rotate. If you can rotate, you can draw it this way or this way. This is the meaning of this DH diagram: you are just drawing it at a particular configuration. But if there is no joint, you do not rotate it. That means that if you try to draw it this way, then you will be wrong, because you did not represent this configuration, which is a camera pointing downward.

Now, after you have assigned all the coordinates according to the DH diagram, then the next step is to define the four kinematic parameters. The first three joints are similar, so I will not go through that. It is exactly the same as Example 2.10 last week. Let us just go through joint four and joint five, starting from joint four. Now, over here, joint four: the kinematic parameters of joint four actually tell you the relationship between this frame and this frame. What is the relationship between this frame and this frame? That means, what is the coordinate transformation of this frame with respect to the previous frame. To understand the relationship between them, one way is that you use the definitions of the kinematic parameters. The other way is to see that the coordinates initially coincide, that means imagine this one was here, in the exact configuration, and try to figure out how you move to this location. It can be done by aligning x and aligning z. Aligning x will give you the two kinematic parameters, joint angle and joint distance, the relationship between x with respect to z.

For example, over here, this is your x-three, this is your x-four. Therefore, the joint angle now is equal to zero. You are drawing it at a joint angle equal to zero, but do not put zero. If you put zero here, you are wrong. Because remember, the objective of forward kinematics modeling is to derive a general model so that, given the joint angle, you can use it to find the position and orientation, given any joint angle. Therefore, you must put Q4. But you may put a bracket there saying that currently it is equal to zero. But do not replace Q4 by zero. This is the first kinematic parameter, that means that currently the joint angle four is equal to zero, because we sketch it at joint angle four equal to zero. After that, we can see that the joint distance is equal to zero, because there is no translation of x with respect to z. Both of the x axes are on the whiteboard, correct? The z axis is into the whiteboard. So they are on this paper. There is no translation between them. Therefore, this is equal to zero. That means that you rotate by the joint angle, and after that x is already aligned as far as z is concerned. So no more transformation is needed.

Next is to align z. Now, z-three is here, z-four is here. I need to translate along this direction by a distance of A4. This is the next one, a translation by a distance of A4. That is called your link length. Now, after it is translated, you can see that it is not aligned yet. z is not aligned yet. There is an angle of 90 degrees between them. You can put down 90 degrees first. After that, there is a sign. At this stage, take note that your z-three and z-four are already the same. Sorry, x-three and x-four are already the same. The next is to rotate z-three and z-four about x. The right-hand rule says that if this is your reference, which is x-four, then this direction will be positive. But now we are rotating the other way round. Therefore, we have a negative sign here. This means that in order to align these two, you can see that I need to rotate downward by 90 degrees, and the right-hand rule says that rotating downwards will be negative, because x-four is my reference. Here you can see that basically you rotate by the joint angle, translate by the joint distance, then translate by the link length, then rotate by the link twist angle. But it makes no sense to multiply these four matrices together every time. We have a general one later on. We just substitute these particular parameters into the general one, which is derived for any four kinematic parameters. Then we can get the particular one.

Next, we move on to the last joint. In the last joint, we also have four sets of kinematic parameters. Firstly, D5 is here; either you put Q5 or theta five, it means the same thing. Next, take note that this Q5 is currently in this direction. This is x-four, and this is x-five. x-four and x-five are making an angle of 90 degrees. Let me sketch it here. This is my x-four, this is my x-five, there is an angle of 90 degrees. This basically means that your joint angle here currently is 90 degrees. Well, you do not put 90 degrees. Do not substitute Q5 by 90 degrees. Because of the way you have sketched this one, you sketch x in this direction, therefore it becomes 90 degrees. If you sketch it some other way round, for example this way, then you can sketch x this way into the whiteboard. Then basically you are sketching it at zero degrees. Why we can do that is because there is a joint angle here. You can rotate to any angle that you wish and sketch it. But we do not replace this by 90 degrees. Do not replace it by 90 degrees. Put Q5. But if you want to remind yourself, put a bracket: currently it is 90 degrees. And why negative? Because it is with respect to your z. This is your z axis, this is your x. You need to rotate this way to align with this one. Rotating this way is against the right-hand rule, because this is your reference. The other way around is positive; this is negative. Which means that currently it is negative 90, just for your information, because of this. No need to put this. Just put a general angle. Let us assume that we rotate by a joint angle of 90 degrees.

After that, you can see that x and x are not aligned yet. This is my x, this is my x. There is a translation of D5 with respect to z. Next, x should move downwards along the direction of z to this location. This explains what D5 is. Now, once you reach that location, you can see everything is already aligned. z-four and z-five are already aligned. This explains why the last two are equal to zero. You need not translate anymore, you need not rotate anymore, because the origins are the same and the z axes are parallel. I am trying to explain to you the physical meaning so that you do not have to remember the definition. You just look at the relationship between the coordinates and try to figure out what the kinematic parameters are. This is the second step of the forward kinematics modeling, to get the kinematic parameters.

After we have obtained the four sets of kinematic parameters for each joint, we can then use them to calculate the transformation matrix from one frame to another. This step is quite straightforward, in the sense that you just substitute all these parameters into the general transformation matrix. For joint one, two, three, four, five, just substitute one by one into this general one. For example, k equal to one, then you just put k equal to one; everything becomes one. Just copy it down, because this is standard. We need not derive it again. We just use it like a lookup formula that we can use to get the particular one. After that, you substitute all these parameters. For example, if this is 0.5, then you just put this as 0.5. If A is equal to zero, then go to all the A and put them equal to zero. And D1 is your variable; it must be a variable. If you put zero, for example, then you can see that there is no more joint angle, and you cannot use it to calculate the forward kinematics anymore. Lastly, alpha one is equal to negative 90 degrees. Plug it into here, cosine, sine, press the calculator. And repeat it for k equal to two, k equal to three. You will get frame zero to one for k equal to one, and for k equal to two you get one to two, and for k equal to three, three with respect to two, and so on and so forth.

This is the major axis. You may want to partition your multiplications as major and minor. If you do that, you can check that you will be able to get all these transformation matrices. In each of these transformation matrices, there must be one joint variable. Here you can see that this is cosine of Q1, this is cosine of Q2, this is cosine of D3. Therefore, they are functions of all the joint variables. If you multiply these together and simplify it, that will give you the transformation matrix of the major axis, the wrist with respect to the base. Because the robot may be designed in such a way that only the minor axis is different for the company. Therefore, you can actually derive this one so that you do not have to keep deriving it for the remaining models with lesser degrees of freedom in the minor axis. This is one way to partition.

After that, you move to k equal to four and calculate the transformation of frame four with respect to three. Lastly, k equal to five gives you the transformation of the tool frame. The fifth one will be the tool frame with respect to the previous joint. This is the minor axis. As I said, the purpose of this one is to go through the complete process, knowing how the four kinematic parameters are derived. After that, we can get this tool frame. Again, just substitute this into here, and then substitute this set into here, simplifying it. Typically, with the help of a calculator, you can actually get these transformation matrices and multiply them together, giving you the transformation matrix of the tool frame with respect to the wrist. We have the wrist with respect to the base, and then we have the tool with respect to the wrist. Finally, we multiply them together. That will give you the entire relationship of the tool frame with respect to the base frame.

The final matrix will be in a homogeneous coordinate form. You need to partition it into this form in order to retrieve the physical meaning. This is a three by one vector which represents the translation. This is a three by three matrix which represents the orientation of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. In the forward kinematics model, we have substituted all the joint angles into it. Finally, if you multiply them together, there will be a function of all the joint angles. The last matrix is derived by multiplying the major axis and the minor axis together, to get the overall transformation matrix of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. As I said, you partition it into this form so as to retrieve the physical meaning. This will be the translation; this will be the rotation. It basically means that after I have multiplied everything together, this is T01, this is T12, this is T23, this is the wrist with respect to the base. Then after that, we have the minor axis, three to four and then four to five. These are the minor axis. Multiply everything together, and you get this transformation matrix of the tool frame, which is the fifth frame with respect to the base frame, as a function of the joints.

The meaning of this vector here is the translation of the origin of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. This is basically the forward kinematics model. Because you can see from this model that, given joint angles D1, D2, D3, D4, we can calculate the translation. The translation is the position x, y, z of the robot. This is your base frame, your reference. Where is this location along the x axis? Where is the position with respect to z, and where is the position with respect to y? All this can now be calculated from here, in the sense that this is x. Given joint angles, calculate the position of the end effector along the x axis; given joint angles, calculate the position along the y axis; given joint angles, calculate the position along the z axis. By doing so, you can now predict the position of the end effector as a function of the joint variables.

But position is not enough, because in order to ask the robot to do a task, this is three-dimensional space, x, y, z, but you also have orientation, rotation about x, rotation about y, rotation about z. In fact, here you can see the approach, the sliding, and the normal. They are captured by this matrix over here. And how it works is that you partition it into this form. There are three vectors, three-dimensional. The first vector is actually x, the second vector is actually y, the third vector is actually z. Remember, z is the approach direction, y is the sliding direction, x is the normal direction. From here, you can calculate the approach direction of your end effector as a function of the joint variables. From this vector, you can calculate the sliding direction of your gripper. How you align your gripper will depend on these directions, as a function of the joint variables. Actually, if you have these two, that is already enough; the normal is just some kind of redundant information. You just need to approach and align your sliding direction, then you can grasp anything. But in three-dimensional space, we will keep all the information over here. This is basically the forward kinematics.

Sometimes we will call this R1. R stands for rotation, one stands for column one. This is column two, this is column three. But remember, the physical meaning is x, y, and z of your tool frame with respect to the base frame, how they are oriented as functions of the joint variables. Basically, given this, we can then use it to calculate the position and orientation of the end effector as functions of the joint variables. That means that if you know this model, given any angle, maybe this is 30, and this is 50, and this is zero, or any other angles, you can actually predict the position and the orientation. Position refers to where the position of this vector over here is, given all these angles, not just this angle. Given any angles, you can straight away predict where the position is, and the orientation can also be predicted. That means where the approach direction will be, where the sliding direction will be. All this can be calculated from the forward kinematics model over here.

This was just to go through the complete step for forward kinematics modeling. We will go through another example, because we learn by repeating. If you see it the first time, it is always confusing; you need to read through it, review it, and then practice it yourself. Do not just look at all these examples. Go back and try to derive everything by yourself, to see whether you can get the same thing or at least a similar thing, because DH assignments are not unique. You may have answers different by plus or minus, typically.

Now, next, we are given a robot. Here we show you the actual picture of the robot. Given this robot system, the first thing that you need to do is to try to identify all the joint axes. Over here, this is actually a compartment with a motor. Therefore, there is a rotational axis over here. And you know that this will be your z axis. And here there is another motor compartment, so this is another z axis. Next, there is this prismatic joint extending up and down. This robot can extend the link length up and down. This is the third joint. The last joint is this rotation. The first three joints will do the position; the last joint will do the orientation. This robot has a limited degree of freedom. It can only point downward. I will show you the animation of this robot. This is the first joint. It rotates with respect to a vertical axis. This will be your z-zero. How about x and y? No restriction. Maybe you want to call this x, up to you. So long as you assign it properly, after that, fix it, and all the users follow. I am talking about the perspective of a robotics engineer. You design this and the user will follow. If you assign this as x, then all the users will say that this is the x direction, and this block is located at a certain distance along the x axis, a certain distance along the y axis, and the z axis will be upward. So this is the first step.

The second step is to find the next joint axis, which will be this axis. You must imagine that it is rotating with respect to this axis, also vertically upwards. These two joint axes are parallel. Next, joint three is a prismatic joint, which can extend up or down. Here you can see that by rotating joint one, joint two, and translating joint three, basically you can control the position in three-dimensional space. But that is not enough, because if there is a gripper here, you may want to align it with the flat surface of the part. This is joint four. It may not be very obvious, but you can see that the blue part is rotating. This is exactly this robot, where you can rotate joint one, joint two, and the prismatic joint, translating it to position your end effector. After that, you need to rotate this end effector by another joint, D4. D1, D2, D3 prismatic, and theta four. These are all the joint axes.

In the next few slides, I am just trying to explain how we derive from this diagram, and you should start from scratch. Do not just read; as I said, derive, and see whether you can derive something similar or not. For this example, we will go through all the steps again: DH representation, kinematic parameters, link transformations, then multiply them together, starting from DH representation.

Now, DH representation says that you go to the first joint, identify the joint axis, and assign it as z-zero. How about x and y? Not stated. Not stated means that you can assign them freely, according to the right-hand rule. One guideline only: z-zero is the rotational axis of joint one. Then you move on to the next joint and identify the joint axis. Easy to remember: all the joint axes are the z axes. You go to the robot again. Remember that this is the joint rotation axis of D1, joint one. Therefore, your z axis is either this way or this way. Even the frame is not unique. But it makes sense to assign it upward. This means that everything above the floor will be positive, and everything downward will be negative. If you assign it downward, it means that everything in your workspace will have to deal with negative coordinates of the z axis. Usually all robots will assign it upward.

Now, after that, assign x and y for your base frame. You can assign x and y first. How do you assign? The right-hand rule. It is up to you to assign x or y. You can also assign this way; if you want this to be x, also fine, then this will be y. So long as it satisfies the right-hand rule. It is not unique. Once it is assigned, it sticks. Later on, the user will know which one is x, which one is y, which one is z. We move on to the next axis, this rotation axis. Again, there are two possibilities: one is up or downward, both are fine. I will follow the textbook: downward. When you assign downward, it basically means that you assign the direction of rotation, which direction is positive, which direction is negative. By assigning z, you are saying that this rotation direction will be positive.

Okay, next, we move on to the next joint. Remember that the next joint is a prismatic joint. You will translate up and down. In this case, it is straightforward. It means that your z-two can be either up or down. Both are fine. So here I will just put downward. Now, after that, move on to the next joint. The last joint is actually a rotational angle. Suppose there is a gripper here. Then you need to rotate this gripper. So you need something here to rotate it. To rotate that, it means that this is your joint axis, either downward or upward. This one you can put either downward or upward. Now, these are all the joint axes, where you just plot them at the physical location of the motor, for example. And then this one just put it here.

After that, you start to find the origin of the next frame. And by the way, right before that, for the tool frame: once you reach the last joint, the next one will be the tool frame. For the tool frame, follow this rule, which you can find over here. Not so obvious, but it is actually here, the last step of your DH algorithm. It says that you align z with the approach, align y with the sliding, align x with the normal. x is perpendicular to both y and z according to the right-hand rule. Go back to here: you see that if you draw your gripper this way, this will be z, and this will be y, the sliding. It can be this way also. The z has only one direction; it must be the approach direction. That means if you draw a gripper this way, this will be the approach. The sliding can be two ways. Once you choose one of them, x should be perpendicular to both according to the right-hand rule. There is this clause at the end of the DH algorithm. Do pay attention to that.

Next, we shall just find the intersection of all the z axes. That will be the origin of the next frame. If they do not intersect, then find the intersection of the z axis with a common normal between the z axes. After you identify the origin, you identify x, which is perpendicular to z. It is very easy to remember: do all the z first. Using z, you identify the origin as well as the x. After that, y is just the right-hand rule. This is what we will do next.

We will now start to extend all the z axes, starting from here and here. You see that sometimes they are parallel, which means that they do not intersect. That is why there is this cross here. If they do not intersect, then the intersection of the current z axis, which you are trying to find the origin of, with a common normal, which is this line over here, will be the origin of the next frame. That means you just draw the joint at the physical location of your joint, in this case which is this compartment over here. This is the joint axis. There is another joint axis. There is a common normal between them. After that, x should be perpendicular to both, and you point x away from the previous joint. Just point away from the previous frame, and along the common normal. That is still perpendicular to both. x is always perpendicular. And y comes out naturally from the right-hand rule.

After that, we see that this z and this z are also parallel. This gives you a common normal. The intersection of this common normal with this z axis gives you the origin of the next frame. And point x away from the previous joint along the common normal. This one you can only point this way. You cannot point the other way around, because there is this cross here saying that you point away.

After that, we go to this z and this z. If you extend them, you will see that they intersect everywhere, along this line, because they are basically right along the same line. This basically means that you can put the origin anywhere along that line. For example, if you want to put it here, then there is no translation between them. But if you do that, it will be quite messy. Usually, what you should do is place it at this location, just before the end effector, because this is where, for a robot, you need to change the tools quite frequently. Sometimes you change it to a gripper, sometimes to a grinding tool, sometimes to a polishing tool for different tasks. Usually, we will partition it at this point, so that this can be changed. Here, I will just put it at this location. Later on, you will see that by doing so, you can also derive your kinematic parameters more easily. But you are not wrong if you put it at any location, such as putting it here. It is just that your kinematic parameters will be different. Actually, we put it at this location mainly because this then will be the joint distance. This D, the physical distance from here to here, will be my joint distance, which is a variable. For this joint, which is a prismatic joint, the joint distance becomes your joint variable. For a revolute joint, rotation is your variable; for a prismatic joint, translation. If you place it at that location and you find that it is very difficult to define your translation, then you just place it again.

After that, I will put x perpendicular to z. You can see that here you can put it anywhere. Because if you have a line, perpendicular means anywhere along this line: this is perpendicular, this is also perpendicular, draw anywhere. You draw it this way or this way, also fine. Because your theta four is an angle. Basically, you can rotate. You are just sketching it at a particular angle, theta four. In this case, I am sketching it at a particular angle of theta four equal to zero. Once you reach the last joint, which is theta four, take note that this one you do not follow this anymore. There is no more joint. You put this as the approach, this one as the sliding, and this is the normal vector, according to the physical meaning. That is how we assign the coordinates using the DH algorithm. Once you do it a few times, it will be less difficult. We have obtained the DH diagram.

Next, you use this DH diagram to derive the kinematic parameters, because the kinematic parameters basically tell you the transformation between each of the coordinates: rotate, translate, translate, rotate. There are two ways to get the four kinematic parameters. One is to use the definition. The joint parameters are the relationship between x with respect to z: joint angle is the rotation, and joint distance is the translation. After that, there are two more parameters, the link parameters. This will be the other way around: z with respect to x. The first one, as I said, is to align x with respect to z. The next two are to align z with respect to x. Then you can know the relationship between them. This is the basic definition, which I think you need not remember if you understand the physical meaning of the joint parameters.

Now, when you start, the table will be empty. Do not just read, because you need to learn how to fill out this table by yourself. Go back and try all the examples. I will also pose some exercises for you to do so that you can understand the complete process. I will just use one robot for you to derive all the kinematics, inverse kinematics, et cetera.

Let us return to this example. Starting from a blank table, you know that there are four joints, so one, two, three, four. Four joints, four sets of kinematic parameters. Remember, five joints, five sets of kinematic parameters; six joints, six sets; seven, seven sets. Firstly, fill in the variable. This is a revolute joint, first joint; revolute joint, second joint; revolute joint, third joint; remember, prismatic joint. You go to the next one: revolute. Last one: revolute. Hey, you do not have to know what the angle is. Maybe theta one is zero, no need to know. Theta two, maybe 90 degrees, also no need to put. Just put a variable, because you want to derive a general formula so that, given theta one, theta two, D3, you will be able to use this model to calculate the position and orientation.

However, if you put D3 here, maybe it is quite confusing. Suppose that you have D1, D2, D4. Then you do not really know which one is the constant and which one is the variable. Therefore, usually in this situation, you should define them as Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4. That means Q1 is theta one, Q2 is theta two, Q3 is D3, and Q4 is theta four. Then, even if you have D1, D2, D4, it is quite clear that D3, which is Q3, is a variable, and D1, D2, D4 are constants. So this is just a notation, do not worry too much. You can define D3 if you want. For example, if this is 0.5, this is 0.4, this is 0.6, it is very clear that D3 is a variable. But sometimes the company will derive the kinematic model for a family of robots, that means robots with different dimensions but the same kinematic structure. Therefore, it is useful to put it this way. We have theta one, theta two as Q1, Q2, and D3 as Q3, and theta four as Q4. This is our DH diagram.

After that, we will use it to identify the other kinematic parameters. This one you fill up first. Then you need to fill up the other three. Which means that you only need to identify three.

Let us start from the first one. Currently, you can see that your x-zero and x-one are parallel. This means that you sketch it at theta one equal to zero. Actually, you can also sketch it this way if you want, because there is a joint angle, but you cannot sketch it, there is nothing to rotate here. In fact, you saw the robot just now; you cannot move upwards. You must follow the physical constraint and take into consideration the degree of freedom that you have from the joint. If you draw this way, your joint angle one will be zero. If you draw the other way round, your joint angle one will be 180 degrees. But you do not put zero, you do not put 180 degrees. You put Q1, because you want the general model. Please do not put zero. Just put Q1.

After that, we move on to D1. As I said, do not put Q1 equal to zero, put Q1. Move on to D1. Here, in order to align your x, one of them is here, one of them is there, and you can see that you need to go up by a distance of D1. This is the physical meaning of D1. Now, this is an example where you have two translations. In the past, there was only one translation. This one has two, because after this moves upward, you can see that your z is here, but you want to move it to this location, which means that you still need to translate, translate by A1 along the x axis. Here you can see that x is already aligned. Therefore, whether x-three or x-four, it does not matter, but here we take reference to x-four. The next one will be a translation. Translate along x to align z by a translation of A1. When you reach this location, you can see that z still needs to rotate by 180 degrees. That means you need to rotate downward in order to move to the new location. If it is 180 degrees, no need to worry about the sign. Whether you put positive or negative, it will be the same. If you are facing one direction, whether you rotate clockwise or anticlockwise, so long as you rotate 180 degrees, you will face backward. So you do not need to worry about the sign. Just put positive or negative, both are correct. Then they will be aligned. That means that you just imagine how a frame will move from this location to this location: you will rotate, translate, translate, and rotate before they are aligned. As I said, rather than deriving four fundamental homogeneous transformation matrices and multiplying them together each time, we have derived a general one so that we just plug in these kinematic parameters to calculate the particular one. This is joint one.

Let us move on to joint two. Now, for your information, we are sketching it at joint two equal to zero, x aligned, meaning that we are sketching it at joint two equal to zero. But as I said, do not put zero, just put Q2. After that, take note that x at this stage is already on the same line. There is no more displacement needed as far as z is concerned. This explains why this is zero over here. We need not have any displacement along the z axis in order to align x. If this were upward, suppose that is a physical displacement, you would need to translate downward first, and this would become your joint distance. But in this case, they are aligned. Maybe I will just show you over here. This link is actually here. You must imagine this link is actually downward, parallel with this one. So it depends on whether there is any offset or not; if there is an offset, you have to take that into consideration.

After that, we need to align z. z is here, and you need to translate by a distance of A2. So this explains this parameter over here: translate a distance of A2, and after you translate, you can see that the z has already aligned. No rotation is required. So you get a zero over here. Now, suppose that you draw it upwards, because it is not unique. Then when you reach here, if this is downward, then you need to rotate by 180 degrees. Typically, if you check with your friends, the answer will be different by zero or pi, plus or minus. Both are correct, because it is not unique.

The next set of kinematic parameters will be for a prismatic joint. Here we draw it at this particular configuration where Q3 is equal to a fixed length. But Q3 is a variable; it can extend up and down. As I said, first put here, then fill up the rest. If you look at the x axis indicated by the blue line, because I draw it this way, my theta is equal to zero. Be careful, this is a variable, this becomes a constant. Now, if you draw it this way, because it is not unique, then you get 180 degrees, which is a constant also. If you draw this direction, then it becomes 90 degrees, and it is also a constant. It depends on where you draw it, again, because it is not unique. Here, I will simply do it this way to make my kinematic parameters simpler. That means theta equal to zero. At the same time, remember, I say that you place your coordinates here, then the distance becomes the joint distance, the variable, so that your Q3 will appear as the kinematic parameter of joint three. Next, note that after you translate by Q3, there is no more translation, no more rotation. You get zero and zero. In this case, what we need is just a translation of Q3 along the z axis. After that, everything is aligned. We need not do any more transformation.

The last one is the last joint, which is the relationship between these two. Q4 is a variable. Currently, your x axis is 90 degrees, because you draw it this way, but Q4 is a variable. Currently, the two x axes are making an angle of 90 degrees with respect to x. That means that if you rotate by 90 degrees, which is your joint angle, then you align x. After you turn it by 90 degrees, you need to translate by D4. After you translate by D4, they are already aligned. Therefore, no more translation, no more rotation. Again, do not put this as 90; 90 means I draw it at 90 degrees. You can also draw it at zero degrees or other angles. But to derive the kinematics model, we put Q4 as a general term, so that given Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, you can find the position and orientation. You must put a general input so as to get a general output.

Next is to use these four sets of kinematic parameters to calculate the link coordinate transformation. We have derived a general one, so that given any kinematic parameters, we can calculate the transformation matrix from one frame to another without having to multiply the matrices four times in each calculation. We will just make use of this to find the transformation matrices. This is just substitution. Substitute this kinematic parameter into this matrix for k equal to one, then simplify it, and you will get the first frame with respect to the base frame. Next, you can also substitute into the subsequent ones. Maybe I will just run through the first one. You put k equal to one. Put this one, put this zero. Put everything with k equal to one. After that, D1 is a constant. For this company, maybe you will have three models, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4, different dimensions, depending on the applications of the users. Usually, we put a general term, and for each model we substitute the physical parameters into it. Same thing, A1 maybe will be 0.3, 0.5, 0.6, just for illustration. Then you can get three models with different sizes. Finally, alpha one is pi. Cosine pi and sine pi, using a calculator, reduce to one and zero. This basically gives you a particular transformation matrix, which is this one over here. This is from the first set of kinematic parameters.

Then you move on to the second set of kinematic parameters. Similarly, put Q2 as a general one, put D2 as constant, this is a general dimension but it is constant, can be 0.5, 0.4, et cetera, and alpha is equal to zero. Put it into the general transformation matrix, and then you can get frame two with respect to one. After that, we move on similarly. Now D3 is a variable, Q3. A3 is equal to zero, and alpha three is also equal to zero. This is a very simple one because there are a lot of zeros, and zeros will simplify your transformation matrix significantly. This is the third frame with respect to the second frame. There are only four joints. The last one will be the fourth joint, which is the tool frame with respect to the wrist, and we multiply them all together. In this case, you can multiply them all together because the minor axis has only one joint. These are the major axis; this is the minor. You can only do rotation of your end effector. You multiply everything together, then you will be able to get one transformation matrix of the final frame, which is the fourth frame with respect to the zero frame, which is the base frame.

So we have this transformation matrix after multiplying everything together. What does it give you? It basically gives you the relationship of the tool frame with respect to the base frame. This is how it looks after multiplying everything together, and we should always partition it into this form to obtain the physical meaning. Namely, that will be the x, y, z with respect to the base frame. Where is the x, y, z of your end effector with respect to the base frame? Orientation is described by partitioning this rotation transformation into three vectors. Each one is three-dimensional. Over here, we can see that this one will be the approach, this will be the sliding, this will be the normal direction. In short, this will be the position of the end effector with respect to the base frame as a function of the joint angles. Given joint angle one, joint angle two, by the way, C12 means cosine of Q1 minus Q2, and similarly S12 means sine of Q1 minus Q2. This is just a shorthand in order to simplify the notation. Given joint angle one and joint angle two, I can use the first equation to calculate x, the second equation to calculate the y position, and the third one basically gives you the z position.

In fact, the z position is quite straightforward. You can actually obtain it by inspection, because z is here. Where is the position of your end effector with respect to the base? That means, how far is it away from the floor? You can see that to get z, you use D1 minus this distance, which is a variable, minus this D, which is fixed. This is your gripper; the length of your gripper is a fixed length. I say again, D1 minus Q3 minus D gives you z. z is actually D1 minus Q3, a variable, that will be changing. That means that as Q3 is changing, given Q3, you can find z.

Next, we have this rotation matrix over here, which you should partition into these three vectors. Each of them has a different meaning. Suppose that I multiply this matrix by (1, 0, 0), which is the x axis. That means this one. This means that if you are at this mobile frame, you look at this tip of the x axis, it will always be (1, 0, 0). This is mobile. If you want to find out what it is with respect to the fixed frame, which is your base frame, then you need to multiply by this rotation transformation. If you multiply them, you will get the first column, because you multiply this and you get this one. The other elements will be multiplied by zero. Same thing, you always multiply by the first element only; the others will be multiplied by zero. Which means that R1 is actually the orientation of your x axis attached to the mobile frame, expressed in your reference frame, as a function of the joint variables. In this case, it will be Q1, Q2, and Q4, because this is sine of Q1 minus Q2 minus Q4. Next, this vector is with respect to the y axis, because if you multiply by (0, 1, 0), you get this one. Lastly, if you multiply by (0, 0, 1), you get this only.

Notice that the last column is a fixed vector. It is independent of the joint angles. That is because this robot has a limited degree of freedom. You can see that no matter how I change my joint angles, it is always pointing downward. This is a fixed direction. Even if I change this one, it also points downward. And even if you change D4 or theta four, up and down, it is still pointing downward. It is just that the length is changing. Theta four also does not change it, because it is rotating with respect to that axis. That means all the joint angles do not really change this direction. It is always pointing downward. I say again, this z-four will always be pointing downward, no matter how you change your Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4. That means it is independent, which explains why we get this one here. Next is (0, 0, negative one). Actually, that is because your z here is (0, 0, 1). x is (1, 0, 0), y is (0, 1, 0), unit vectors along the x axis, y axis, and z axis. Therefore, z is (0, 0, 1), and this is the negative of z-zero. Zero is a reference; this is the other way around. Therefore, you have negative (0, 0, 1), which is (0, 0, negative one). This can roughly tell you whether you have derived correctly or not, because if you look at the robot and try to understand whether it is dependent on which joints, you can roughly check whether you have got the correct answer or not.

We partition it into this form: R1 is x, R2 is column two, that means y, and R3 will be z. R1, R2, R3, x, y, z. This basically tells you the relationship of the position and orientation of the end effector with respect to the base frame, as a function of the joint variables. The last example is just an illustration, given that Q1 equals pi over four, Q2 equals negative pi over three, Q3, which is a prismatic joint, is 120 mm, and Q4 is equal to pi over two. I want you to calculate the position. Substitute into the position, that means this one. Substitute into here, calculate x, y, and z, and you can calculate the orientation, R1, R2, in this configuration.

Finally, after you multiply, if you are not sure whether you have multiplied correctly or not, one thing to take note of is that these are all unit vectors. They are all unit vectors, because you multiply by (1, 0, 0), which is x, and you transform it into a representation with respect to the base, but they are still unit vectors; it is just that they are oriented. Therefore, if you look at all these three vectors, this is a unit vector, this is very obvious. This one is also a unit vector, because sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one. The square of this plus the square of this plus the square of this is the magnitude; then you take the square root, which would be the length of the vector, and it is equal to one. That is one way to check. If you have multiplied wrongly, that means you made a careless mistake, and in the end you may end up with a non-unit vector, which means that there is a careless mistake somewhere. This is how we can check.

So let us stop here for a break, because we have completed the topic of forward kinematics. We will take a break for 15 minutes as usual. Please come back at 8:25, and then we will start another topic called inverse kinematics.

Welcome back. We have completed the topic of direct kinematics, or forward kinematics. Recall that forward kinematics is to model an equation so that, given the joint angles, you can find the position and orientation of the end effector. The purpose of deriving the forward kinematics model is actually to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Because in a robotic task, we do the reverse: given the task, you are going to find out the joint angles so as to achieve the task. This means inverse kinematics: given the desired position, maybe the location of a part, so given the x, y, z position of the part, and given the orientation, given how you want to approach the part, given how you want to orientate your gripper, R2 and R3, how do we command the robot to pick up the part at this location, x, y, z, and a certain orientation? That means, given the location and the orientation, what are the joint angles to achieve this? This is the objective.

Let me show you the animation. This robot needs to track this circular and straight line as specified by the orange frame. In order to do so, you need to know what the joint angles one, two, three, four, five, six are, if you have six joints, so that you can exactly position at the desired position. Given that task, you need to find these joint angles as functions of the task, and this task is not fixed. At a certain time, it is at a certain location. This basically means that you need to find the joint trajectory continuously, by solving the inverse kinematics problem. I say again, given the task, given the desired position and orientation, what is the joint configuration?

Now, humans do not have this problem, because we just reach out very easily using vision feedback to reach for the desired position. A robot is a low-level machine. You must tell it exactly what to do. In order to reach for that position, what should all the joint angles be so that it can reach for that position? Therefore, we first need to model the forward kinematics model. The purpose of the forward kinematics model is actually to solve the inverse kinematics problem. You first model the direct kinematics equation, then you solve the inverse kinematics problem using the forward kinematics equation.

For example, suppose that you want to command the robot to pick up this part. Firstly, you must know where the location is, x, y, z, with respect to the base frame. Secondly, you must also specify what the approach direction is, and what the sliding direction is, so that you can design a controller to command the robot to pick up the part. You must align your gripper, for instance, to be aligned with the flat surface. Otherwise, it may not be a stable grasp. In order to do this task, you need to tell the robot what joint one is, what joint two is, what joint three is, what joint four, five, six are, depending on how many degrees of freedom you have, so that you can pick up this part. Given a certain task, in terms of position and orientation, find the joint angles. This is the reverse. Forward kinematics means, given joint angles, find the position and orientation. Inverse kinematics, given the position and orientation of a specific object that you want to pick up, find out what the joint angles are to reach for this task. Because, as I said, a robot is a low-level machine. Therefore, we need to model this kinematic equation and use it to solve the inverse kinematics problem. This is what we will do in the remaining part of this lecture as well as the beginning of next week's lecture.

Let me use the simplest example to illustrate this concept first. This is a very simple robot with only one joint. Imagine here there is a motor to rotate this joint, and as a result, the position of the end point will change. x and y will change as a function of theta. For this simple mechanism, I can actually derive the forward kinematics equation directly by inspection, because x is L cosine theta. L is the link length. L projected along the x axis gives you L cosine theta. y is actually L sine theta. This means that, given theta, you can find x and y, which is what we call the direct or forward kinematics equation. Now, inverse kinematics is the other way round. Inverse kinematics means, given x and y, find theta.

Usually, we do not solve it using an individual equation, because sine and cosine are not one-to-one. For example, given the same x, there are two possibilities: it can be a positive angle or a negative angle. I am trying to say that you should not use this equation to solve it, because if x is positive, y can be positive or negative, which gives you different coordinates. One way to overcome this problem is that you just divide y by x. Then L and L cancel each other, and you get tangent. Tangent theta basically gives you theta equal to arctangent of y over x. If you use tangent, then the quadrant will be taken into consideration. That means which quadrant it is in depends on whether x is positive or y is negative. If x and y are both positive, it will be here. If x is positive and y is negative, then it will be here. Similarly, over here, x is negative while y is positive. In this case, both x and y will be negative. By using tangent, in particular, there is a function called atan2. Given x and y, and depending on the sign of x and y, we can get this angle in any quadrant. Which means that if you see two equations with sine and cosine, usually you should combine them by division, which will tell you the correct quadrant it is in.

Now, before we can solve the inverse kinematics problem, we need to compact the representation of the orientation, because we are operating in three-dimensional space, x, y, z. For position, it is very natural. Position is a translation, just x, y, z, three-dimensional. However, orientation is not really a compact representation, because two-thirds of the information is redundant. If you look at the orientation matrix, it consists of R1, R2, R3. Position is okay, because position is three-dimensional; it is just a translation of the origin of the mobile frame with respect to the origin of the base frame. However, for orientation, this is represented by three vectors, R1, R2, R3, and each of these three vectors is three-dimensional. This is the example that we saw before the break, page 35, where you have R1, R2, and R3, each of them three-dimensional. This basically means that if you put them into a vector, this vector is nine-dimensional. When you stack them out into a vector, it will be nine-dimensional. But orientation should be three-dimensional. Position is three-dimensional. Orientation is rotation about x, y, z. A minimum representation of the orientation will be three-dimensional. Now you have a nine-dimensional vector, so two-thirds of the information is redundant. It is not a minimum representation of the orientation. Usually, before we solve the inverse kinematics problem, we will try to compact the orientation from nine dimensions to three dimensions. We are going to compact it into a three-dimensional representation of the orientation. It is called a minimum representation, and then we can put it into vector form.

There are various ways to compact the orientation. Here, we will use the tool configuration vector form, because this is the easiest form. There are many other forms which you can read on your own, such as Euler angles. These are other representations of the orientation so that you can put it into a minimum representation, three-dimensional. As I said, we only focus on the tool configuration vector, which is easier to understand. The purpose is to understand the concept that for orientation, there is redundant information, which you need to put into a more compact form.

Let us look at the orientation again, which consists of three vectors: the approach vector, sliding vector, and normal vector. Now, the approach vector is important, because it tells you the direction of the end effector. But it has one problem: you cannot use the approach vector alone, because it does not tell you the rotation of the sliding vector. It does not tell you how the sliding vector is rotated. In fact, if you look at all the robots, let me use this robot to illustrate. You can see that no matter how I rotate the joint, my approach vector in some cases is changing, and in some cases does not. For example, the last joint: if I rotate the last joint, the approach vector does not change, but it does give me the gripper direction. So I say again, if I change my joint one, my approach vector changes. If I change joint two, my approach vector also changes. If I change joint three, the approach direction is also changing. Similarly, joint four and joint five will change your approach direction. But the only one which will not change your approach direction is the last joint, the roll angle. Now it is pointing towards you. No matter how I rotate this joint, it will still be pointing towards you.

If you go back to this, it basically tells you that the approach direction does not give you the roll direction, which is the sliding direction of your gripper. Because no matter how you rotate your roll angle, the last joint, you will not rotate your gripper direction. Which means that if you just use the approach vector alone, it is not enough to represent the orientation, even though this is three-dimensional. We need to have both. We need to have the approach, and we also need to have the angle. One way is to put R3 and Qn into a vector. But it is still not a minimum representation, because it is four-dimensional. Because R3 is three-dimensional and Qn is one joint angle, altogether it is four-dimensional. Which means that we cannot use this.

The idea of the tool configuration vector is actually very simple. Suppose that you take the approach vector, which is this one. And remember, this is your roll angle. As I illustrated to you just now, no matter how you rotate your roll angle, it does not change your approach direction; it is still pointing in the same direction. We need to have both R3 and Qn used to define your orientation. But if we simply append Qn to R3, it is still four-dimensional. The idea of the tool configuration vector is stated here. Note that R3, which is a unit vector, specifies a certain direction. Suppose that you multiply this approach vector by a scalar A. R3 is a unit vector. If you multiply by A, the magnitude will become A. If A is positive, then you will not change the direction. A must be positive. I say again, if you take this approach vector and multiply by a scalar, your vector will change magnitude, depending on whether A is greater than one or less than one. If it is greater than one, it increases the magnitude. If A is less than one, the magnitude is smaller. The whole idea is that A must be positive in such a way that the direction of the approach vector will not change. If A is negative, then you have a problem, because you will change the direction of your approach vector, R3.

Now, how do we link it to our roll angle? We try to get an A as a function of the roll angle, so that A is positive. An exponential term is one example, because if you have an exponential term to the power of something, take note that it is always positive. Whether x is positive, negative, or equal to zero, it will always be a positive quantity. This basically means that I can put this exponential term as a function of Q4, where Q4 can be positive or negative. Your Q4 can rotate one direction as positive, and rotate the other direction as negative. And I want a positive quantity that is a function of Q4 so that I can include my Q4 in the magnitude of the approach vector. So A is e to the power of Q4 divided by pi. Pi is just some scaling factor to convert it into the appropriate quantity. Even without that, it is also fine. Suppose that you put it directly in radians, then you can just put an exponential term to the power of Q4.

Next, multiply this term, as a function of Q4, by R3. You get something like this: R3 multiplied by a positive quantity. This positive quantity is a function of Qn. Qn can be positive or negative, but the exponential term of Qn is always positive. This is a key idea. It means that I can get my R3 from the direction of the vector, and I can get my Qn from the magnitude of the vector. This gives me the approach vector as well as the roll angle in a compact form, because this will be three-dimensional. If you have a three-dimensional vector and you multiply by a scalar, the magnitude is still three-dimensional. This is one way to represent your orientation in a compact manner.

So to summarize, we need the approach vector, and we also need the sliding vector. But if you put the approach vector and sliding vector together, even if you take out R1, it is still six-dimensional, which is not a minimum representation. We observe that we do not really need R2, because rotating Qn is equivalent to rotating R2. One way is to put R1 and Qn. However, it is still four-dimensional, still not the minimum representation. The whole idea is, can you multiply R1 by Qn? If you do so, because Qn can be positive or negative, if it is negative, your approach vector changes direction, which is not what we want, because my approach vector should always be in this direction. Therefore, the idea is that I will multiply R3, the approach vector, by a positive quantity, which is this exponential function of Qn. So that even if Qn is positive or negative, this will always remain positive. At the same time, I can get a three-dimensional vector, which is a minimum representation of the orientation. This is the idea.

The other thing to take note of is that the exponential term looks like this. If this is your Qn, and this is Qn divided by pi as the exponential term: when it is positive, it is increasing; when it is negative, it is decreasing towards zero, but you will not reach zero. It can be a very small quantity, but you will not reach zero, and Qn is actually limited, by plus or minus 180 degrees, for example. Therefore, we can obtain this mapping, which is one-to-one. One-to-one is important, because when you solve the inverse kinematics problem, you must be able to get a unique value. For each A, we will be able to get a unique roll angle in solving the inverse kinematics problem.

This basically means that from the transformation matrix, we have a p and an R, and these are the redundant information. Firstly, we take out p directly. As for the rotation, we have R1, R2, and R3. We will take out R3 only, and that represents the approach direction. In order to represent the sliding direction, we take out Qn, because by rotating Qn, you can rotate the sliding direction as well. In order to compact it into a minimum representation, we put e to the power of Qn divided by pi, multiplied by R3. This basically means that I encode this Qn into the magnitude of the orientation vector. The direction of the orientation vector can be obtained from the vector itself. It gives you the direction of the approach vector, and Qn gives you the sliding direction of your gripper. This is the basic idea so that we can then give a minimum representation, because the approach and sliding together are six-dimensional. This is three-dimensional, this is three-dimensional; this is a scalar. And this is a compact representation of the position and orientation, by using this method, which we call the tool configuration vector. As I said, there are other methods. If you are interested, you can read more. I have uploaded this slide, so you need not copy it down.

This is just a summary of what we have discussed so far. After you have obtained the forward kinematics model, you partition it into this form: p represents the translation, the position; R represents the orientation. p is the translation, this three-dimensional part. This is straightforward, no need to do anything. However, for the orientation, it consists of three vectors, R1, R2, R3, which are the approach, sliding, and normal directions. If you put them into a vector, it will be nine-dimensional. Two-thirds of the information is redundant, because the minimum representation is six-dimensional: three for position, three for orientation, rotation about x, y, and z. In order to do so, we just take out R3 only and put it here. R3, take note, is three-dimensional. But if you just put p and R3, it is not enough, because it does not give you the sliding information. You must align your gripper with the flat surface of the object. We notice that Qn will be able to rotate your sliding vector with respect to your approach vector. When you rotate it, it can give you the gripper direction as well. We can take out Qn as well, with R3. But this is still four-dimensional. Basically, we just merge the two into this form, by using the exponential term of Qn divided by pi, so that it is always positive. In the sense that it is another vector, where the direction is still the same, still the approach direction, but the magnitude of it can give you the roll angle. As a result, you can have three-dimensional for position and three-dimensional for orientation. In total, it gives you a minimum representation of your position and orientation. This is the key idea.

Let us look at one example where we have derived the forward kinematics model for this SCARA robot. In this case, you can see that we want to find out the inverse kinematics equation: what joint one, joint two, and joint three will be, and how to rotate joint four so that you will pick up a certain part. That means, given the location of the part, and given the orientation as well as the sliding direction, how do we find out the joint angles to achieve this task? This is the inverse kinematics problem. In order to solve the inverse kinematics problem, you must first derive the forward kinematics model, and then put it into a minimum representation. Minimum representation: p is three-dimensional; let us call it B1, B2, B3. The orientation is also put into a compact form, three-dimensional; let us call it B4, B5, B6. We have a six-dimensional vector, let us call it B. This is called the tool configuration vector.

Let us go back to page 35 before the break, where we have derived the forward kinematics model for this SCARA robot, and we will have to put this transformation matrix into this form, where we have a minimum representation, six-dimensional. So the first step is to take out the position. Let us call it P1, P2, P3, or you can call it x, y, z, it does not matter. Just put it into the vector directly. Next, take out R3. What is R3? Your approach vector. Then put it here. But it does not give you the sliding direction, which is the direction of the gripper. And the gripper direction is determined by Q4. This is a robot where it is always pointing downward, and you rotate Q4 to rotate the gripper. We take Q4, and encode it with an exponential term, which is always positive, and multiply by the approach vector. You can get a three-dimensional vector, where the magnitude represents the Q4, and the direction represents the approach direction. Altogether, we have a six-dimensional vector.

I am trying to explain how we derive this one. Notice that here there is a transpose, which means the transpose of this. The transpose of this will basically be a column vector. There is a row vector; you transpose it, and you get a column vector. That is actually called the tool configuration vector. Here, negative I3 means (0, 0, negative one). This is just a shorthand for this approach direction. This robot has only four degrees of freedom. Therefore, you can see that you cannot achieve some orientations. Orientation has three dimensions, but in this case, two of them are fixed. I can only rotate the gripper, that is all. I cannot change the approach direction.

Now, with this, we are ready to formally introduce the inverse kinematics problem. Given a tool configuration vector, which is six-dimensional, the purpose of solving the inverse kinematics problem is to find out what the joint angles are, given a task: given the position of the object, given the orientation in which you want to pick up the object, what should the joint angles be to accomplish this task? There are two ways to solve this problem. Suppose that you have the forward kinematics model, a function of the joint angles, and you put it into the tool configuration form. Then, given a task, let us call it B desired, given a desired position and orientation representing the task, what should the joint angles be to accomplish this task? This involves solving the inverse kinematics problem.

One way is to use a numerical method. Some of you may take a numerical methods course, which means that you leave it to the algorithm to find out what Q matches B. In order to put it into a numerical problem, you need to write this equation into this form: find Q that satisfies this equation. Sometimes, using numerical methods, you cannot get exactly zero. What you need to do is take the norm of this, which is always positive, then try to minimize it. Minimize means you try to find the solution which is close to zero. You may not be able to find exactly zero, but at least it should be as small as possible, close to zero. This is called a minimization problem. You have an objective function; you try to minimize it. This method is easy to implement. However, it has a problem: every time you have a new location of the object, you need to solve the numerical algorithm, which may take many iterations to converge. For example, it may take 1,000 iterations to solve the numerical problem to find the solution. Each time you have a new task, you need to go through this numerical algorithm over and over again, which means that it is time-consuming. In a production line, time is critical. You want it to be executed as fast as possible. So a numerical method is not very good if you cannot find the closed-form solution.

An analytic method is usually used, which means that you try to find a closed-form solution, an explicit equation, and then use it to calculate your joint angle directly. The whole idea is like this: given this task, I want to find a closed-form solution, an analytic equation, so that I can calculate Q given any position and orientation, without having to go through iterative algorithms a few thousand times each time you have a new task. Which means that we will usually use analytic methods. But just for your information, a numerical method is possible, if you cannot find a closed-form solution.

Now, here, let us look at some basic definitions or conditions for the existence of a solution, meaning that you must be able to solve the inverse kinematics problem. Actually, this is quite common sense. Your desired position must be within your work envelope. You should not specify a position outside the reach of the robot, then you cannot find a solution. It does happen in simulation. Some students may put a position which is beyond the reach of the robot, and you cannot find a solution. Orientation is also the same. If your robot has a limited degree of freedom, such as a SCARA robot which is always pointing downward, then if you try to make the robot achieve an orientation which is not vertically downward, obviously you cannot find the solution. All this actually means that it must be realizable: p must be within the workspace, and the orientation must be within the limited degrees of freedom of the robot. That means that if the robot has only five joints, it cannot realize some orientations. But if you have a robot with six joints, then you need not worry. The only thing you have to ensure is that the position is within the workspace. Orientation, if you have six joints, you can realize any orientation.

Now, sometimes you may have more than three joints for your minor axis, and as a result, you have more than six joints, three for position and maybe four for orientation. Maybe you have an extra degree of freedom; that kind of robot is called a redundant robot. Redundant means that you have more than required. But the redundancy, the additional degree of freedom, can be used in obstacle avoidance sometimes. For example, in order to reach for this position with a certain orientation, at the same time avoiding something, you may need an additional degree of freedom in order to achieve that. In this case, it is called a redundant robot.

Now, next, in solving your inverse kinematics problem, take note that it may not give you a unique solution sometimes. This is an illustration where the position of the robot is here, and this is the orientation specified by the approach as well as the roll angle. A fixed roll angle will give you a particular direction of the gripper. In this case, you can see that there are actually two possibilities. Sometimes the joint can be in a different configuration. This is to say that if your arm can bend the other way around, we usually bend this way, but if you can bend the other way round, you can see that to reach for the same point, there are two configurations. For a human being, it is quite unique; for a robot, because it is a motor, it can rotate 360 degrees. Sometimes you may end up with multiple solutions. In this case, you just choose one of them. The solution may not be unique.

Now, let us return to Example 2.12, where we have obtained the forward kinematics model. Remember, early on, after multiplying all the transformation matrices together, we get a single transformation matrix. For position, it is straightforward, R3. Orientation is nine-dimensional; two-thirds of the information is redundant. The whole idea of compact representation is to convert the orientation from nine-dimensional into three-dimensional. One way is that you first take out the position and take out the approach vector, which is three-dimensional. This is the approach vector; this is the position vector. But if you just take the approach vector, something is missing, which is the direction of the gripper. The direction of the gripper can be specified by the roll angle, the last angle. In this case, this is Q5. This robot has only five joints. You cannot realize an arbitrary orientation unless you have six joints. You take out the roll angle, put it into a positive function of the roll angle, which is the exponential function, and multiply R3 by this exponential term. Then you can put it into a compact representation. This is your R3, this is your exponential term. Multiply your R3 by this exponential term, then you can encode the roll angle into your orientation vector, which is still three-dimensional. This is called the tool configuration vector. It is just one way to represent your orientation in the minimum form.

Now, after we have obtained this, we can now solve the inverse kinematics problem. The first three, we call B1, B2, B3, and then B4, B5, B6. Altogether, six-dimensional. Now, what is forward kinematics? Forward kinematics means that given the joint angles, find the position and orientation. But a robot task is the reverse: given the position of the object, given the orientation in which you want to pick up the object, you want to tell the robot what the joint angles are. You want to find the joint angles to achieve this task. You must tell the robot exactly what to do, because it is a low-level machine. You must tell it exactly what joint angle one, joint angle two, joint angle three, joint angle four, joint angle five are. This robot has only five joints, so that it can move to that desired position and accomplish the desired orientation. That means that first you derive the forward kinematics model, put it into a compact minimum representation, then solve the inverse kinematics problem so that, given any position and any orientation, I will be able to find the joint configuration. This is the so-called inverse kinematics problem.

Now, here, there is a problem, because every robot has a different kinematic equation. This is a particular kinematic equation. If you move to another robot, you have a different equation. Similarly, if you have six degrees of freedom, then you also have different joint angles from one to six. Which means that the inverse kinematics solution is not unique. It depends on the kinematic structure. Therefore, there is no systematic way, unless you use a numerical method: you just put this into the numerical solution and try to find the joint angles which fit this equation. But as I said, that is not effective, because it is time-consuming. In a production line, we want everything to execute at a very fast pace. This basically means that I need to find out an analytic equation so that, given any position, and sometimes a different orientation, I should be able to use this equation to immediately calculate the joint angles without going through any iterations as in the numerical methods. This is called the analytic method, closed-form solution.

However, solving these equations will require a mathematical background in trigonometry, because all these are sine and cosine. You need to review your trigonometry and then observe all the equations carefully in order to solve them. Usually, we will use two methods. If you divide sine by cosine, you get tangent. Next, if you square sine and square cosine and add them, it is equal to one. These two are the most common trigonometric methods that we will use in solving the inverse kinematics problem.

Let us look at some of the details. Now, firstly, if I observe the first two equations, let us focus on the first two equations. One is x, one is y. If you look at the first two equations carefully, everything in the bracket is the same. Outside the bracket, that means C1, S1, cosine one, sine one, they are different. Look at this equation again, and see that everything in the bracket, which is underlined by the dotted line, is the same. This basically means that if you try to divide the two equations, then you can cancel the common terms. If you can cancel the common terms, then you are only left with sine and cosine, which is tangent of Q1. By dividing the first two equations, I can cancel a lot of common terms, and I can get a very simple equation, which is B2 divided by B1 is tangent. This means that Q1 is arctangent of B2 over B1. This is my first inverse kinematics equation. Given B1 and B2, given the desired position of x, given the location of the object, I can use this to calculate my first joint, Q1. By the way, I will upload all this on NTU Learn, so you do not need to copy, you can just download it. And this is my first inverse kinematics equation. It says that, given B1 and B2, find Q1.

Next, in solving your inverse kinematics equation, one thing to take note of is that eventually you will implement them in a program. As a robotics engineer, you model the forward kinematics, then you solve the inverse kinematics equation, and you put it into a program for the user to use. Users are just operators, factory operators. They cannot learn programming and just use it; they will not know what is inside the robot system. The engineers design it so that the production operator can use it. So as far as the production operator is concerned, they will just key in B1 and B2, the x, y position, as well as other parameters. Then the program will run to the first step, find Q1. So for the robotics engineers, we will program this equation into the program. And as you run the program, when you reach this step, you calculate Q1. From there onwards, Q1 is known. When you run the program to this step, after you execute this command, Q1 is already a known parameter, a known angle. When you solve the inverse kinematics problem, you should trace which one is known, which is not known, and at what stage. If Q1 is known, next, if you look at all the equations again, by the way, this is just what I mentioned just now, because your angles may have different values when x, y is in a different quadrant. In this case, usually there is this function called atan2. atan2 can take care of which quadrant it is in, not to worry too much.

Next, after Q1 is known, if you go back to the forward kinematics equation again and identify: this is known, this is known, this and these are also known. We already know some of the parameters inside this kinematic equation. I will focus on the last three, to try to isolate the parameters Q3 and Q4. Because this is sine of Q3 plus Q4, this is cosine of Q3 plus Q4. Because of the fact that Q1 is already known, I can do this. I will multiply the first equation by cosine Q1. If you multiply the first equation by cosine Q1 on the right side, and multiply the second one by sine Q1 on both sides, then basically you get cosine squared and sine squared. Why do you do that? Remember, I say that you use this quite often: cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to one. The purpose is that if I multiply by this, I get a square. If you get a square, then you can add them. Sine squared plus cosine squared is equal to one. When you add them up, this is a common term, and this is also a common term. I say again, I multiply the fourth equation by C1, I multiply the fifth equation by S1. On the other side of the equation, I get cosine one squared and sine one squared, and the others are all common terms. In the sense that you get sine squared plus cosine squared, and this is equal to one, and it will disappear, and you become an equation with only sine of Q2 plus Q3 plus Q4, as well as the exponential term e to the power of Q5 divided by pi.

Next, I invert the sign of this, that means I multiply both sides by negative, so that it becomes positive. I just invert the sign so that it becomes positive on the right-hand side. Then notice that here I have a similar term, except that sine is cosine. Which means that if I divide this equation by the last equation, which is B6, and I invert the sign, then I can get this term to cancel. I will get sine divided by cosine, which is tangent of Q3 plus Q4. Now, Q1 is known, because you have calculated it by the first inverse kinematics equation. Imagine you run the program; it is calculated. This basically means that you know what cosine Q1 is; you can calculate sine Q1, and B4, B5, B6 are user input, where the desired position and orientation are. Which means everything on the left-hand side is known. This basically means that you can invert this equation, because everything here is known. You then can calculate Q3 plus Q4 as arctangent of this term.

Basically, I am trying to explain this equation over here. Q3 plus Q4 is the atan2 of this term, given B4, B5, B6 as user input, and after you have calculated Q1, you can use this to calculate Q3 plus Q4. You do not know what Q3 and Q4 are individually, but you know the summation of them. Sometimes you need to calculate them one by one.

So far, what we have done is that we have calculated Q1, and Q3 plus Q4. Then you go back to all your equations again. You will see that because Q3 plus Q4 is known, you can calculate the sine and cosine of them. A and D are the kinematic parameters, which we know. And Q1 is also known. Therefore, everything which I underline in the dotted line is all known at this stage. That means you run the program, you can calculate Q1, and then you can calculate Q3 plus Q4, and then use them to calculate everything that I underline there. Let us focus on the first three equations first. And we will know everything in terms of Q1 and Q3 plus Q4. Even though we know what Q3 plus Q4 is, we do not know what Q3 is, we do not know what Q4 is. We just know the summation. Everything which I underline is unknown. For solving the inverse kinematics problem, you must identify all those known terms, and then try to express the unknown terms in terms of the known terms.

Next, if I observe this kinematic structure properly, again, you know that this is sine, this is cosine. One is cosine, one is sine. If I multiply the first equation by cosine on both sides, multiply
