Good evening class. Welcome to the lectures on EE6221, Robotics and Intelligent Sensors. I'm Dr. Chua from the School of EEE. I will be your lecturer for the first part of this course. If you have any questions, you can always contact me. This is my e-mail and my office location. You can also contact me through the course website on NTU Learn. All the course materials are uploaded at the course website. As this is still the add-drop period, I have not uploaded everything yet. After the add-drop period, all the information for Part one will be available.

As this course name implied, there are two parts of the course, robotics first, followed by intelligent sensors. I'm only covering the first part of the course, and the second part on intelligent sensing will be covered by the second-part lecturer. My part of the course basically can be summarized by this block diagram. In today's lecture, we will review some basic mathematics required to study robotics, in particular kinematics, and we'll also look at some of the applications and specifications for robots. Next week, we will talk about one very basic concept in robotics, which is called kinematics. The studies of robotics start by modeling the kinematics, which is basically a model that gives you the relationship between the joint variables and the position and orientation of the end effector. And we'll also study briefly about trajectory planning.

My part of the course will be basically summarized by this block diagram. Today we'll go through some mathematics required for the study of kinematics. Next week we'll study about kinematics modeling, followed by trajectory planning. The other part of the course is basically on robot control. We will study how to cause the robot to move through a controller. Lastly, the last part of my course will be on mobile robots, and we will only focus on the mobile robot kinematics.

The notes is quite sufficient for you to read through in details, but if you are interested, you can also refer to some of the textbooks. As this is a postgraduate course, you cannot find a single textbook that give you everything. The first textbook will be mainly for the kinematics parts and trajectory planning. The second textbook is a good textbook for robot control, and the last one is for mobile robotics. But as I mentioned, the notes is actually quite sufficient for you to read through in details.

In case you are new, this course, like other courses, is based on 60% examination, closed book, and 40% CA. My part of the course will cover CA one, 15%. Part two will have two CA from the second-part lecturer. Details will be announced later, and there will be another take home assignment as well, which is 10%. My part of the CA, CA one, will be held in week seven during the lecture, and more details will be announced later.

If you are exchange students or new, please note that there will be no lab sessions for this course. However, I will announce some optional lab sessions for you to learn about robot programming, which means that if you're interested, you can contact the lab to learn something and have some hands on sessions about robot programming. As for the others, you need to get some MSc project so as to get some hands on experience on robotics, if you're interested in a robotics project.

Before I start, just to let you know, this course is rather mathematical. Robotics is interesting and is now getting important, but it is not something that is easy to learn and requires some background knowledge, such as matrix theory, linear control theory. All these are actually covered under your undergraduate study, and this is a postgraduate course. Do take note that we assume that you will know linear control theory in particular, because we will go into more advanced robot control theory, which is basically nonlinear control. Do review them as necessary.

Let's start the lecture today. Basically, what is a robot? Robot is actually a reprogrammable multifunctional manipulator, which is able to perform a variety of tasks. The word programmable is important because unlike fixed automated machines, which can only be used to perform a particular task, robot can be used to perform multiple tasks. Just like a human hand, we can learn to perform many tasks.

The word robot actually came from the word "robota", meaning forced labor. Initially, human ambitions was that we want to make robot machines that do something that we do not wish to do. But as robot evolved, nowadays, robot is not necessarily limited to just forced labor. There are a variety of modern applications. The first industrial robots actually was not long ago, it was only in the late 50s. And based on the current technology, you can see how fast this field is advancing through research.

For this course, because it's a beginner course, we will start with manipulator, which is the most basic parts of a robot, or sometimes we call it robotic arm. This figure shows a robotic arm, which is basically multiple joints driving links. The movements of the joints basically move the links, and at the end of the links, there will be a hand or end effector. So the objective is to control the joints, the motors, so that you can achieve a desired position and orientation of the end effector. Very similar to human arm, where we move our joints, and as a result, you will be able to manipulate the hand. The basic purpose of moving the joint is actually to manipulate the hand.

When we use robot, it actually is not necessary that we must always use robot. This figure shows a comparison between three popular methods, manual methods, hard automation methods and soft automation methods. Robot falls in the soft automation methods. Remember that robotics is a programmable multifunctional manipulator, able to perform multiple tasks, not just one task. While hard automation is referring to some automated machines which can only be used to perform a specific task. For example, a pick and place machine to pick up some components and put it on the printed circuit board. This is called a hard automation machine because it can only be used to perform a single type of task such as picking up components and putting it on the PCB.

This figure compared the unit cost of making a product versus production volume. And we have three methods. We can see that at a very low production volume, the manual method is better. This is because automated method has high set-up cost. You need to spend or invest a lot of money on the machines so as to operate, while manual methods is very flexible, you hire sufficient enough operators to perform the task. As production volume increases, manual methods may not be able to cope. So you need machines to speed up the automation. And after some production volume, we can see that the automation methods become very attractive because it can make more through automation. And as the production volume increases, we notice that the hard automation methods, which is the red line, become more cost effective. This is because hard automation methods is specialized in making that product. Therefore, it can make it at a very, very high volume. Unlike robots, robot is flexible, but it may not be as fast as the hard automated machines. Whether to use what types of automation methods or even manual methods, very much depending on the types of products as well as the production volume. Because for soft automated methods such as robotics, the advantage is that after the company decided not to make this product anymore, because it is reprogrammable, you can actually reconfigure and reprogram it for another product. So this is the flexibility. Just like human, we can retrain to learn new skill.

Robot classifications. This is just for your information, that means that if you want to purchase a robot, what kind of classifications and specifications do we look at? Firstly, it can be depending on drive technologies, what kind of drive technologies that you want. The workspace envelopes, how large you want the workspace to be, and also the motion control methods.

For drive technologies, it is basically broadly classified into two types, electric drive, which is DC motors. DC motors will consist of servo motors and stepper motors. Stepper motors, as the name implied, you operate in steps, maybe jump from five degree to ten degree, for instance, which means that you cannot perform closed loop control. This is basically for open loop control. While, in some cases, suppose that you need to manipulate very heavy objects, very heavy loads, you will need a hydraulic drive. So depending on the applications, you will need to use different types of technology. Hydraulic drive are usually not so common because it is not that clean as compared to DC motor. But however, it can be used to manipulate heavy tasks, so it can be used in, for example, construction automation. If you need something to carry heavy loads, and you have to automate it, so you need a hydraulic drive. It is not that clean because you need fluid to drive it.

Now, workspace envelope is another way that you can use to decide the characteristics of your robot to be purchased. For this workspace envelope, it is basically the locus of the points that can be traced by the wrist, which means that if you reach out your arm and you try to stretch it out and move all your joints, you will trace out a workspace envelope. This is basically depending on the first three joints only, which we call the major axis. While the remaining joints, why do we say remaining joints, because robots can come with multiple degrees of freedom. You can have four joints, five joint, six joint, seven joint, eight joints. We say that the first three joints define the major axis, and the remaining joints is the minor axis, which is used to establish the orientations of the tools.

Some of you may be wondering why we only look at the first three joints. Here, I show you animations. Suppose that I take up one robot, maybe this one. And if I move the first three joints, this is the first joint. You can see that the end effector is moving. That means the end of the robot manipulator is always moving. This is second, and this is the third joint. If you reach for the maximum reach and trace out this end point of the wrist, basically, you can know roughly the workspace. Here, the last three joint, as you will see here, is for orientation. This is fourth, this is fifth, and this is the last joint. So therefore, the first three joints is mainly to define the positions, and the remaining joints is basically used to define the orientations of the end effector.

So if you review these slides, you understand that we can trace the workspace envelopes by using the first three joints. Remaining joint, we use to define the orientations.

And there are two types of joints in a robot. Unlike human joints, human joints are all revolute joints. That means that you can only rotate your joints, but robot is a machine. It has a special joint type, prismatic joint. The left hand side of this animation is a revolute joint. It's easy to understand, you have a motor attached to the joint. When the motor move, the link attached to the motor will move about the joint. As for prismatic joint, it is causing some translation. Usually, you use some mechanical conversion to convert rotational rotation to a linear translation. Therefore, robot has two types of joint, you can extend the link, or you can rotate the joint.

Depending on what types of joint you use, P stands for prismatic, R stands for revolute joints, and how you connect them together, you will have a different types of workspace envelope.

Here for the first workspace envelope, it is called Cartesian workspace, and we have a Cartesian coordinate robot with three prismatic joint. This is easy to understand. Suppose that you put three prismatic joints in the x, y and z axis, perpendicular to each other, you basically can form a workspace, which is basically a Cartesian workspace. So this is the first type of joint, which is Cartesian coordinate joint.

Suppose that I replace the first joint by a revolute joint. That means instead of a prismatic joint, suppose that you can rotate this base, and in this case, you trace out a cylindrical workspace.

Next, suppose that I replace one more joint, the second joint by a revolute joint. This resulted in spherical workspace, which means that second joint instead of prismatic joints, you can also rotate. And basically, your workspace will look like a spherical coordinates workspace.

As I said, depending on how you connect the joints together, you may get different workspace. For instance, this robot, we call SCARA robot, is also based on two revolute joints and one prismatic joint. But however, it is connected in a different way. Therefore, the workspace is also slightly different. In this configuration, basically, you rotate the first joint and the second joint, revolute joints, and then you extend this end effector up and down. This is good for pick and place operation.

Lastly, it can be all revolute joints. If all the joints are revolute joints, it is quite similar to human arm, where all the joints are revolute. The workspace is also quite similar to our workspace. It's called articulated coordinate workspace.

There are also different types of control methods. Suppose that you only need a robot that do pick and place tasks, that means you pick up a part at a position, what we call a point, and move it to another position. In this case, you can use a simpler controller. But however, for some more demanding tasks, where you need to follow a path, usually you need a more advanced controller. This means that we need path control or tracking control. This animation show point to point control, you pick up an object, move it to another location. But for some more demanding tasks, such as spraying something over a workspace, you need to plan a continuous path, such as a straight line, maintain a certain distance away from the part, and spray the paint over the path. And all these require different controllers, which means different cost sometime. So we decide what to buy by our specific applications, and also that depends on the budget as well.

Now, it will also depends on the applications. Some robots must be used in some very clean environment, while some can be used in normal environment. So depending on the application, we also need to decide what types of robots to purchase.

Now, traditionally, robots was used in factory automation. Japanese was very good in automating their automobile plants, and the typical task will involve spot welding, welding, spray painting, material handling, et cetera. But as robot evolved, nowadays, we will see robots not limited to manipulators in factory automation. In fact, a lot of the applications in robots started quite long ago.

Space and deep sea exploration started very long ago. If you look at the international space station, search for the diagram, you'll see that outside, there is a very huge manipulator. There is a robot manipulator. The astronauts over there can use it to teleoperate to do some maintenance, so that they don't have to always go out of the space station and risk their life for some simple servicing and maintenance tasks.

Now, sea exploration is also quite commonly used. Many years ago, one Malaysia airline took off from Kuala Lumpur on the way to Beijing and it disappeared. You can do a search on that. Until now it's not found yet. And actually, at that time, the researchers and the company deployed a lot of underwater robots to search for it, and recently they tried to search for it again, but it was still not found yet. So this technology can be useful for some ranges which we human cannot reach or very hard to reach.

Military and police missions. After 9/11, a lot of the militaries and police started to use robots for bomb disposal, for example, and during Japan's nuclear crisis, autonomous robot were also sent to the nuclear plant to see whether is it dangerous or not for the humans to go in. Unfortunately, basically, those drones that you see in the recent wars are results of robotic technologies. Robot technology originally was intended to help human improve our life, and in the end, it was used for some other purposes.

Now, pets and entertainment is interesting. In around 1990-something, Sony, you know Sony is good in entertainment business, game, music. They came up with a concept called pets entertainment. That means you come up with a robotic pet. Nowadays, because some of us live in cities, your parents may not allow you to keep a pet, but robotic pets may be possible. At that time, they came up with this concept to try to sell the robotic pet. But unfortunately, they were too ahead of time and the technology was not right yet. So it was not that successful, but it's a nice idea because they believe that the definition of entertainment should not be narrowly limited to just games and music. Robotics technology can come in to improve the definition of entertainment.

This figure shows a humanoid robot. Nowadays, we see a lot of videos on humanoids, but this robot was actually invented by Honda. Honda is known for making car. Very few people know that they make humanoid robots, also around the same period, 1996. Because the Japanese thinks that rather than spending the money into advertisement, because to promote your car, you need to advertise, rather than spending the money into advertisement, they use this money in R&D to invest in this humanoid robot. The idea is that humanoid robot is interesting. If you bring this humanoid robot to the automobile show, all the crowds will gather around your booth, and everybody will know the brand of Honda. So this is quite interesting concept. Rather than putting your money directly into advertisement, which will come to waste, can you have other more innovative way of advertising your product, at the same time, also be able to invest in a new product, possible new products?

For example, this could be personal robot. We have personal computers, personal hand phone. If you can come up with a low cost robot, which can follow you around and you can store your data, you can transfer your photos to it, display it, and it can do some simple thing for you, it's actually quite interesting. This is another potential area, personal robots, which can eventually replace everything in simple service.

Medicine. Again, this was not new, 1998, where a university, I think it is University of Edinburgh, came out with a robotic arm, interfaced to real human. Usually, people start to do some experiment with monkeys. They train the monkeys and put some fruits somewhere to see whether monkeys eventually will be able to manipulate the robot's arm to reach for the food. And basically, it was quite successful. All these are very useful because if you have someone who is handicapped, lost the arm, lost the hand, eventually, they will be able to use robotic arms. And nowadays, you also see exoskeletons. I went to China recently, and at some mountains, they actually have some exoskeletons for rental, which means that if you could not climb up the mountains too well, you can actually put on this robotic device so that you can also enjoy the beautiful scenery. So robots are meant to help human beings.

Finally, one more application is autonomous car. Autonomous car is a result of robotics research. And for those who like driving, you may wonder why do we need autonomous car. But suppose that you think of it from a point of view of blind people, they won't be able to drive the car, and old people, they have trouble driving the cars. This kind of technology is actually very useful. They just have to step into the car, some spoken language interaction nowadays it's possible, and set your destination, where you want to go, and the autonomous car will bring you there.

So all these are just some examples of some robot applications as well as emerging technologies. In fact, as I said, all these technologies actually came out from robotics quite long ago. The reasons that you don't see them in the factories or house is because a few factors. Firstly, the cost, it must be attractive enough for everyone to buy. Suppose that you buy hand phone, if the price is not affordable, it may not widely reach out to everyone. The other reason is that there are some safety issue, which is very hard to sort out. For example, if you use a drone to do delivery, it is actually possible technology, correct? But what happened if the drone dropped down? Hit someone, who is going to be responsible? So there are some insurance issue and regulations, which are not quite settled yet. So all these must be settled together with the technology.

Next, let's just go through some robot specifications quickly. How do we specify the robots, is based on several factors. Number of axis, meaning the number of degrees of freedom. Load carrying capacities, speed, reach and stroke, orientation, repeatability, precision, accuracy, as well as operating environment.

Number of axis is the number of degrees of freedom, the number of joints that the robot has, and it can vary from a few degrees of freedom to multiple degrees of freedom. Usually 4 to 6 is sufficient. More than six, we said it is a redundant robot. Why six, because we are operating in a three dimensional space, x, y, z, three d. But don't forget that you have rotation about x, rotation about y, rotation about z. Therefore, to achieve a task in a three dimensional space, you need six degrees of freedom, three for positions, three for orientations. This is called arbitrary position and orientation. That means any position, any orientation. If you have more than six like human joints, this is called redundant robots. Redundant robots means that you have more than necessary. You only need six but you have more than six. But however, this give you some flexibility in your task. In some tasks, you may need to avoid obstacles. Go around some obstacles at the same time, reach for the desired position and orientation, and you need extra degree of freedom. We call redundant degree of freedom.

Now, capacity and speed. Ignore the figures over there because this is always changing. Depending on your load carrying capacity, if you need light load, no need to invest heavily in a robot that can carry heavy load, buy a cheaper robot. Same thing, the speed also vary. Some can operate very fast for high speed application while some may be quite slow.

Reach and stroke is just a rough estimation of your workspace. If you stretch out the end effector horizontally, the possible distance is called the horizontal reach. If you make the wrist travel horizontally, the possible distance is called the horizontal stroke. Similarly, we can define the maximum reach vertically, which is called vertical reach, and the vertical stroke, which is basically the distance that it can travel vertically. So this give you a rough estimation of the workspace. That means that you can roughly estimate what is your workspace envelopes through this.

Now orientation, as I said, the minor axis define your orientation, and because we are operating in a three dimensional space, so therefore, you need at least three degrees of freedom, three degrees of freedom for positions, three degrees of freedom for the orientations. This figure shows three independent joint axis, they are perpendicular to each other, and it's called the yaw, pitch, roll. Now, if you rotate your end effector with respect to this axis, this is called yaw. Imagine there's a motor there rotating it. Now, suppose that you rotate about this axis, another independent axis, you actually perform some motion similar to throwing some bombs. This is called pitching motion. Lastly, the last joint is actually causing a rotation of your end effector. That means that you can rotate this end effector to orientate the flat surface to align with some flat surfaces so as to pick up the parts more in a stable manner. Three independent axis give you independent control of the orientations of the end effector. This means that you basically can coordinate these three joints to achieve any orientation in the three dimension space.

Now, repeatability, accuracy and precision. It looks similar, but they are all different. Repeatability means the ability to repeat the operations, that means the positioning of your end effector. Repeatability is important because industrial robots are used for repetitive tasks. That means you perform the same operation over and over again. Imagine that it is not repeatable. First three times were very accurate. After operating for 1,000 times, it drifted to another location. This illustration shows someone who is repeatable but not accurate. That means that you're shooting at the wrong place, doing the wrong thing over and over again. Now, accuracy is important. It means that you need to be able to reach the desired position that you want. Non repeatable means that sometimes you are here but sometimes you're outside. Sometimes you are too far away, or it could be drifting after some time. Initially, it was quite okay. After some time, it drifted to another location. Now precision is not the accuracy, it is the resolution. Robot cannot move in any resolution. It has a smallest distance that your end effector can travel. If you require micro scale accuracy, you need a micro manipulator.

All these are the specifications of your robots, and all these also mean different costs. Lastly, just to caution you that suppose that you want to automate something in a clean room environment, making IC, you cannot just purchase a normal robot because the robot must be made to satisfy the clean room environment, which is very stringent. As a result, the cost of your robot will also be higher. That means that if you want to operate in the clean room environment, you must basically tell the suppliers that you want to meet this requirement. And of course, it will come with a higher cost.

Now, the Chapter one is just for your information. Do not try to remember all these technical specifications, et cetera. It is just to highlight to you that after you graduate, suppose that you want to use the robots, how should you go about choosing the robots? It's actually based on a set of criteria, applications, and what kind of task that you want to perform.

Now, let us start with the first main topic, kinematics. Kinematics is the most basic topic in robotics. All classes of robotics start by studying kinematics. Now, before we look at kinematics, let us understand how a robot manipulator works. Basically, robot manipulators has actuators, such as motors. Actuators is used to drive joints. As you send a signal from your computers to the motors, they will start to rotate. This is controller. Controller send a signal to the motors, they'll start to move the joint, and the joint will start to move the links. Robot consists of multiple joints, multiple links. At the end of the robot, there is an end effector. Usually it's a gripper. Some come with multi finger hand, depending on the application. The other end is usually fixed, but you can also mount it on some mobile platforms. In fact, humanoid robots, you mount it on a legged platform. This can be treated as one arm of the humanoid robot as well.

So the objective is actually to control the end effector through the joint. That means, how do we control the joints so as to coordinate the joints in such a way that the end effector move in a predefined manner. This is quite a complex design where we actually need to model it. For human beings, you don't feel it because when you were at a very young age, you actually learned all this and it was connected to your neuron networks in your brain. That enable you to do some coordination of the arms very easily. But robot is a machine. It should be programmed by human. Human need to tell you exactly what to do. In order to do that, you need to first study the kinematics.

The kinematics depends on the types of joints that you use. Just now, I mentioned that there are two types of joint, revolute joint and the prismatic joint. Different joint types and how they are connected will give you different workspace as well as different kinematics.

The objective here is to control the positions and orientations of the tools in the three dimensional space, not only positions, but you need to orientate the part. And in order to do that, we must first derive a mathematical model that give you the relationship between the joint variables and the positions and orientations of the end effector. Kinematics model is basically nothing but to derive a mathematical model, so that given the joint angles, if you key in the joint angles to this model, you can use this model to calculate or predict the positions and orientations of your end effector.

This is a key idea. Let me show you an animation. For example, suppose that I want to know, if Joint one, two, three is ten, 20, 30 degrees, Joint four, five, six are zero degree, where will be the positions of this end effector? One way is that you manually move it to that location and record it. Sometimes this is called teach and playback, but there's a more systematic way that we will learn here. We want to derive a model. Then use this model. When I key in this input to the model, 10, 20, 30, I'll be able to calculate the position and orientation in advance, without having to move the physical robot or simulate it. This is the objective. We want to come up with a model so that given any joint angles, not just this example, I can use it to calculate the positions and orientations of any end effector. This is the basic objective of modeling the kinematics.

Now, I will start with simplest example. Just one joint and one link of a robot. Of course, actual robot will not be that simple. Imagine that here you have a motor which will rotate this link. This link has a fixed link length of L, and this angle is variable. That means that you can rotate to be any positions in this two dimensional space. Forward kinematics basically means, given this joint angle, find the positions and orientation. For this simple robot, we can actually write down the kinematics models based on simple mathematics. Because x is L cosine, y is L sine. We can actually model it very quickly. But imagine that you have a robot with multiple degrees of freedom. It will be very hard to write down the forward kinematics equation by inspection because it involves multiple joints and multiple links. Therefore, we need to have a very systematic way of deriving the forward kinematics of the robot so that we can use this model to predict the positions and orientations of the robot. And of course, you can see that you require some mathematics, linear algebra, as well as matrix as well as transformations here to model this forward kinematics model.

Let's review some of the basic concepts that everybody learned in university undergraduate course. Here, suppose that P is a vector in an n dimensional space, and let a set of vectors x1, x2 to xn be a complete orthonormal set. These are the definitions in mathematics saying that all these vectors are perpendicular, making 90 degree with respect to each other, and they are unit vectors. Unit vectors means that all of them has a length of one. Basically, this means that it is the basis for the vector in the n dimensional space. The coordinates of the vector, with respect to each of these axis, can be obtained by dot product. P is actually a linear combination of the basis vectors, which means that you express the vector in the n dimensional space as a linear combination of all these basis vectors, and then you take the dot product with respect to each of the basis axis, you actually get the coordinates.

Now, sounds mathematical, but actually something everybody knows, except that this is more general. Let's reduce it to a two dimensional space. In a two dimensional space, you have x1, x2. So this is two dimensional space. Therefore, you only have two basis vectors. I actually call it the x, y axis. Here, we call x1, x2. It can be x, y, z in three dimensional space. Therefore, we know that any vector in the two dimensional space such as this one, can be expressed as a linear combination of these two basis vectors. Very easy to understand. If you take the dot product of this vector with one of the basis vectors, basically what you get is this coordinate along the horizontal axis. You take the dot product with respect to x2, you get a coordinate with respect to the vertical axis. In general, this is defined over here. You can just refer to this simple example while we go through this more general concepts and work it out, then you'll be able to understand it better.

Now back to robot, three dimensional space. Remember that you want to control the positions of the robot in a three dimensional space. We live in the physical world, which is actually a three dimensional space. But in order to have orientations, we need another three degrees of freedom. But the coordinate is actually three dimensional, x, y, z, rotation about x, y and z. It's just that here we call x1, x2, x3. The axis which are perpendicular to each other, and they are unit vectors. Remember they are unit vectors. This form an orthonormal set.

Now, here I use F to denote fixed, M to denote mobile. Why do we need to define two types of coordinates is because robots consist of both types of coordinates. One is a fixed coordinate, which is attached to the base. This fixed coordinate will not be moving with your joints. And this is the world coordinates for the robot. The robot will issue commands with respect to these coordinates. At every joint, especially at the end effector, you have another coordinate, which is attached to the end effector. So therefore, when the joint move, your end effector will move, and therefore, your coordinates attached to the end effector will also move. So therefore, it is called mobile coordinate.

There are two types of coordinates, fixed coordinate F, mobile coordinate M, each is three degrees of freedom. Let us differentiate them by putting the basis vectors as F1, F2, F3. And then M1, M2, M3, three independent axis. Remember that any vector in a three dimensional space can be expressed as a linear combination of the basis vectors, and P1, P2, P3, are called the coordinates in the three dimensional space. That means that what is the length along F1 axis? What is the length along F2, F3 axis respectively.

My coordinates can be expressed in terms of the fixed coordinate frame. But here, let us consider that we have a mobile coordinate, M1, M2, M3, which is rotated with respect to the origin of this fixed frame. They are not the same. It is slightly rotated. And suppose that someone is sitting in the mobile frame, looking at the same position, you have a different coordinates, which is something like this, will be equal to M1, M2, M3 with P1, P2, P3.

It is something very easy to understand. Imagine that you're sitting inside your car and you look at everything inside your car, it will be with respect to the mobile coordinates, because you're moving together with the car. But if someone is outside the car, when it is looking at the same thing inside your car while your car is moving or rotating, you will not be the same. But however, both of you are looking at the same point. Here I define the same point with two different coordinates. One is a fixed coordinate, not moving. The other one is rotating, such as the joint rotating, and I can get the second equation.

So I label this equation with any number, then I proceed to find a transformation matrix. Here is a rotation transformation matrix. So that given any coordinates in the mobile frame, I can use this rotation transformation matrix to find a coordinate with respect to the fixed frame. That means that if you know the positions of something inside the car, after the car has rotated, if you know the model, you can actually use it to calculate and tell someone outside that this is the position with respect to you. So this is what we are doing here.

And what is the coordinate? Remember that coordinate is a dot product of your vector with respect to each of the axis. If you're confused, go back to this example. You take the dot product onto this axis, you get this coordinate, which is basically this length. In the three dimensional space, you need to do it three times. One is with respect to F1 axis, F2 axis and F3 axis.

Now, remember that just now, we have expressed P in terms of two coordinates, in terms of fixed and mobile coordinate. Suppose that I substitute P in terms of the mobile coordinate, that means that let's put this into here. Then you give me these three equations. Just a substitution into it. What these three equations give is the relationship between your fixed coordinate and the mobile coordinates. In each equation, you can see that you have P1, P2, P3 with respect to the mobile coordinate. Next, if you take out this mobile coordinate and put it into the vector, then the remaining transformations can be arranged into a three by three matrix. Very easy to check. This matrix multiplication, multiply by this, plus this multiplied by this, basically give you the first equation. Second equation also similarly. If you multiply second row by that vector, you give you the second equation, and lastly, third equation can be similarly stated.

What we are doing here is that we have found a transformation matrix in a general form so that given the coordinates in the mobile frame, we can use it to find the coordinates in the fixed frame. And this is a very general form. That means that if you take the dot product between each axis, you can always find a rotational transformation.

But this is general, but not easy to use for deriving the kinematics of the robots. Kinematics of the robots, remember, is operating in a three dimensional space. You have three axis, one, two, three. And then you have rotation about first axis, rotation about second axis, rotation about third axis. Only three rotation.

Now, we therefore define something we call fundamental rotational matrix. By rotating with respect to one of the axis. For example, if you rotate about the first axis, first axis is here. Suppose that you have two frame initially coincide. That means, imagine that you have M1, M2, M3 as well. They are initially the same. And you rotate it by angle theta, with respect to first axis. If you rotate it with respect to first axis obviously, M1 will not move. M1 will stay with F1. M1 does not change, but M2 and M3 will change. It is rotated with respect to the first axis by an angle theta.

We want to represent this rotation about the first axis by a transformation matrix mathematically. Firstly, if this is theta, this is also rotated by the same angle. This is 90 degree because these are orthonormal set, perpendicular to each other, x, y, z. Therefore, this angle marked here is 90 degree minus theta. Derive all the angles between each of the basis vectors. We can get all the angles between each of the basis vectors. Why is the angle between F1 and M1 zero? Because it's not rotated with respect to that axis.

Now, bear this in mind and go back to the general transformation matrix that we have derived. We can now use this angle to derive a specific transformation matrix. How does dot product relate to angle? This required the review of dot products. If you have two vectors and you want to take the dot product, it's equal to magnitude of the vectors multiply by the cosine of the angle between them. This is what you learn in undergraduate level. Remember, F and M are all basis vectors. That means that they are unit vector. The magnitude is equal to one. For example, F1 is (1, 0, 0). F2 is (0, 1, 0), and then followed by F3, (0, 0, 1). Unit vector means that the magnitude is equal to one. So this two will simplify to one. This means that the dot product of two unit vector is simply the cosine of the angle between them. This explain why we look at all the angles between all these basis vectors.

Let us return to this fundamental rotational transformation matrix R1, which is rotation with respect to the first axis. If it is rotating with respect to the first axis, obviously, the angle between F1 and M1 is equal to zero. If the angle is equal to zero, then cosine zero is equal to one. This explain why you have one there, which is a dot product between two unit vectors. It's only the cosine of the angle, angle is equal to zero. For some other vectors, the dot product is equal to zero if they are perpendicular. That means that F1 is perpendicular to M2 and M3, 90 degree. This explain why you have zero over here and one. Similarly M1 is also perpendicular to F2 and F3. Therefore, all this reduces to zero. Now for angle theta, look at the dot product between F2 and M2. This is F2, this is M2, angle is theta. So obviously, you have cosine theta. Similarly for M3 and F3, the angle is also theta, and this explain why we get cosine theta. Finally, last two elements. The angle between F2 and M3, F2 is this, M3 is this, therefore, it is 90 degree plus theta. And you take cosine of 90 degree plus theta, it become negative sine theta. The angle between F3 and M2, the angle between them is 90 minus theta. If it's 90 minus theta and you take cosine, cosine 90 minus theta is sine theta. You can just press calculator and check.

I'll just show you the derivations of this fundamental rotational transformation matrix with respect to the first axis. Now, you should go back to try to derive the fundamental rotation about second axis and the fundamental rotation about the third axis. I'll leave it as an exercise. That means that just look at the angle between them, substitute into this general transformation matrix, to see whether you can derive this.

One observation of this transformation matrix for your information is that the kth row and kth column of this transformation matrix is actually the kth row and column of the identity matrix. For example, identity matrix means what? Diagonal elements one, off diagonal are zero. You can see that R2, the kth is two. Second row and second column of the identity matrix. R3 is the third row and third column of the identity matrix. This is quite easy to understand because anything multiply by identity matrix is the same. If you have a coordinate, multiply identity matrix, it remain the same. Identity matrix means no transformation. Therefore, if you have second row, second column equal to the second row and second column of the identity matrix, that means that it is not rotating, because second axis is not rotating. It remain the same. In fact, you're rotating with respect to the second axis. R3, you're rotating with respect to the third axis, so third axis will remain the same. The other just some very simple properties that you can use to identify what kind of transformations is. The diagonal elements are always cosine. Imagine that you have the identity matrix elements. The other two will always be, cosine on the diagonal, these two are always sine. But that is plus and minus. How do we determine this plus and minus? It is negative one to the power of k for the one on top, that means above the diagonal elements. For example, if k is two, here you put a positive sign. Once this is positive, the other one will be negative. Over here, k equal to three. Therefore, there's a negative sign over here. Need not worry too much. This is just something that you can observe in all the transformation matrices.

Now, let us look at one example. Suppose that you have a mobile frame which is rotated about the fixed frame, about the first axis of the fixed frame by angle pi over three. Here the coordinates of a point in the mobile frame are given as (2, 0, 3), that means that someone moving together with a mobile frame, looking at this location (2, 0, 3) with respect to first, second and third axis. Here you want to find out what will be the coordinates of the same point in the fixed frame after this mobile frame has been rotated by pi over three with respect to the first axis of the fixed frame. Firstly, you retrieve this fundamental rotational transformation matrix, and then you substitute pi over three into it. And then press calculator. This give you this, multiplied by the coordinate given to you. You can check that. You can get negative 2.598, 1.5 for F2, F3. This is with respect to the fixed frame. That means that once we get all these matrices, we can use that to calculate the relationship between the fixed coordinates and the mobile coordinates.

So far, we have derived three fundamental rotational matrices, that given the coordinate with respect to the mobile frame, we can multiply by this transformation matrix to get the coordinate with respect to the fixed frame. But in some cases, you may need to find the reverse. Reverse means that given P in fixed frame, find the coordinate with respect to the mobile frame. And it can be simply calculated in this way, using the inverse matrix. Inverse matrix is the inverse transformation, reverse transformation to convert it the other way round. Now, usually to calculate the inverse matrix, remember that it's quite tedious, usually, you need to calculate determinant and the adjoint matrix. This is the basic definition. Or you can use some numerical methods. Unfortunately, for all these transformation matrices, the inverse matrix is simply the transpose. Transpose means that you move the row to become column, column become row. For example, this second row, after you transpose it, you will become the second column of your matrix, and that will be the inverse matrix.

It's actually quite easy to understand because inverse matrix can be defined this way as well. Remember, this is R with angle theta. Inverse matrix actually you can put R with negative theta. Why is it so? Now, suppose that you have a matrix R. Inverse matrix means what? If you multiply R by the inverse matrix, you get identity matrix. Basic definition of inverse. Now what is identity matrix? In terms of transformation, it means no change. In terms of rotations, suppose that you have rotated by an angle, to go back to the same position, no change, you need to rotate it back. Suppose that you rotate 90 degree. How do you go back to the original position? You rotate backwards by the same angle. And exactly, you can see from here that if you put negative angle throughout, because cosine negative theta is still cosine theta, but sine negative theta become negative sine theta. The effect is equivalent to just taking the transpose of the matrix. Next time, if you want to calculate the inverse of fundamental rotational transformation, remember, you need not calculate the determinant and the adjoint matrix. Even if you do so, it'll give you the same thing, which is simply the transpose of the matrix. Inverse transformation can be obtained by the transpose or substituting negative angle into it.

Let's look at another example. Suppose that you are given a coordinate P in the fixed frame (3, 4, 0). Using the same example in the previous case, what are the coordinates with respect to the mobile frame? This means now you do the other way round, given P fixed, find the coordinates with respect to the mobile frame. Which means that you go back to this transformation matrix in the previous example, and then just take the transpose. Which means row become column, column become row. After taking the transpose, you multiply by the coordinates in the fixed frame. That will give you the coordinate in mobile frame.

Okay, next, let us look at composite rotation. Composite rotation means a sequence of rotation. We have studied fundamental rotational transformation matrices with respect to first axis, second axis, and third axis. Using this fundamental rotational transformations, you can use it to describe any rotational transformation. Rotation about first, second and third, and this will require multiplications of the matrices. Because matrix multiplication do not commute. Mathematically, it means if you have two matrices A, B, A times B is not equal to B times A unless they are diagonal matrix. Therefore, if you multiply wrongly, it give you different meaning of the transformation. So in order to get the correct transformations, we need to follow this rules, which is for composite rotations.

Now, imagine that initially, you have a mobile frame and a fixed frame, which are coincide, means that no transformation, no rotation. If there's no rotations, then it's identity matrix. No change. Now, suppose that the mobile frame is now rotated by an angle, with respect to one axis of the fixed frame. k can be one, two, or three. Three fundamental rotations. Depending on which axis, then you pre multiply, if it is with respect to the fixed frame. But suppose that it is with respect to the mobile frame's own axis, then you need to post multiply because it's the reverse operation now. In this case, then by following this sequence, we'll be able to describe this sequence of rotations based on the multiplications of all three fundamental rotational transformation.

For example, if you have a mobile frame which is rotated by angle beta with respect to F2, second axis of the fixed frame. Then, we have another rotation, which is about the third axis of the mobile frame M3. In this case, finally, we have one more, which is about the first axis of the mobile frame, by another angle alpha. What will be a single rotational transformation matrix, which describe this sequence of rotation, which is basically described by this composite rule.

Let me show you in sequence. First, you put an identity matrix, which is this one. That means initially they are coincide. Then everything is with respect to this reference. Suppose that you have a rotation about the fixed frame, you pre multiply. This is R2 beta. Pre multiply. Suppose that with respect to mobile axis, you must post multiply. In this case, it will be R3, angle will be equal to gamma. Lastly, the last one also mobile. You follow by another post multiplication, which is R1 alpha. When you multiply them together, you get one single transformation matrix, which describe this sequence of rotation. When you have with respect to fixed frame, pre multiply, with respect to mobile frame, post multiply.

Let's look at another example, the orientation. Remember that you have three independent axis, yaw, pitch and roll, which is the rotations about first axis, second axis, and third axis, with respect to the fixed frame. Suppose that we have a sequence of rotation. Firstly, there's a rotation about fixed F1 by an angle, we call it theta1, followed by F2 with an angle of theta2. Lastly, F3 with an angle of theta3, and all this is with respect to fixed axis. This means that you start with I, and you do the first transformation first, which is F1, pre multiply. Then second transformation is also with respect to the fixed frame, you pre multiply. The last transformation, also with respect to the fixed frame, you pre multiply again. And after that, we write down all the three fundamental rotational transformations, and we multiply them together. We can get a single transformation matrix.

In fact, from here, you can see the characteristic quite easily. This is the first row first column of the identity matrix, so therefore, these are one. Second row, second column, R2. Third row, third column, R3, because they are rotating with respect to that axis, meaning that there's no transformation. The transformation will only transform the other two axis. Multiply them together and then simplifying it, you can check that it's equal to this.

So what is this matrix? This matrix means that I can use this to predict the rotations of my end effector. After a sequence of rotations in this form, yaw, pitch and roll by any angles, which means that given theta1, theta2, theta3, your yaw, pitch, roll angle, any angle, I can use it to find the transformation matrix and then use it to find the orientations of your end effector. So this is example of kinematics equation actually, even though we are still discussing about transformations.

Example 2.5 is a particular case where theta1 is 90 degree, theta2 is negative 90 degree, theta3 is 90 degree. After you have derived this general matrix, you just substitute into it, and it can be simplified into one form. By multiplying all this three together first, you can derive a single transformation matrix, so that subsequently you need not multiply anymore, because there are two ways. One way is that you always find what is R1, R2, R3 with a particular angles and then start multiplying them. But each time you calculate for one orientation, you need to multiply the matrices. This is not effective. Usually in kinematics, we will multiply them manually first, and then use it to calculate for any angles, such as example 2.5, given a particular angle, I can calculate the rotational transformation.

Now, a last example before I take a short break, because it's a three hour lecture. Suppose that now you have a coordinate with respect to the mobile frame (0, 0, 0.6). This actually means this: suppose that you're at the mobile coordinate, you look at the end effector position, assuming that this length is 0.6. Then this position of the end effector, if you are sitting in the mobile frame, is always M1 equal to zero, M2 equal to zero, M3 equal to 0.6. So this explain this coordinate, (0, 0, 0.6). If you are sitting in this mobile frame, you'll always see 0.6, like you are inside the car. No matter how the car move, you always see a fixed coordinate with respect to you.

But someone outside this mobile frame, that means the fixed frame. After this sequence of rotations, with theta1 equal to pi over two, theta2 equal to negative pi over two, theta3 is also pi over two. You want to predict the position of the end effector. This means you multiply this matrix by (0, 0, 0.6). This is the mobile frame, and that gives you the coordinate with respect to the fixed frame, the world frame, which is not moving together. If you simply multiply them, you'll see that it's (0.6, 0, 0). What this means is that after this sequence of rotation, actually, your end effector will be at this position where F1 is equal to 0.6, F2 zero, F3 is also equal to zero. We can use this mathematically to predict the positions of the end effector. Where is it pointing towards? Is now pointing in this direction of (0.6, 0, 0) with respect to the world frame, fixed frame. But if you are sitting together inside the mobile frame, you'll always see 0.6, it's moving together.

Let's take a short break. Otherwise, it will be too tiring for 3 hours. We will take a 15 minutes break. Let's come back at 8:10. If you have any questions during this period, you can also come down to discuss.

[Student question about assignment.] I have no idea. You have to check with the assignment of the second part. In case some of you came late, I noted that I have announced at the beginning of the lectures about the assessment. My assessment is only the first part. For the second part, it will be announced later by the second-part lecturer. Suppose that you need to know in advance for some planning purpose, you need to contact him personally by e-mail. My part, it will be just week seven. And after this class, at the end of this week, I will make an announcement, and after the add-drop period, I will announce another time in case some newcomers join. As for the second part, it will be fixed by another professor, that part will be announced later.

And also some ask about programming. As I said, I will also announce it later on. It is optional, is up to you if you want to learn, you can sign on, because robot programming actually, it will depend on which company, they are slightly different. For this course, we are focusing on the basic of robotics kinematics, mobile robot, sensing. For programming, there are other courses which you can join, mainly from the mechanical engineering. So you can check with the office.

Let us continue on the lectures. We have learned about three fundamental rotation transformations. However, for mobile coordinates, as you can see from this diagram, not only that there's rotation, there's also a translation. Which means that this coordinate will be translated. There's some displacement in the three dimensional space in addition to rotation. This basically means that we need to derive a transformation matrix that can account for both rotation and translation.

Remember that rotation transformations are three by three metrics, and we have derived three of them, R1, R2, and R3. Suppose that you put another transformation, which is a translation x, y, z, into one matrix. In this case, you can see that this lead to a three by four matrix. If you put the rotation, say R1, R2, R3, which is three by three, together with the translation, which is a vector three by one, this lead to three by four matrix, which is not a square matrix.

Now, this has a problem. Suppose that you define a transformation matrix T, which is a three by four matrix. Then you cannot find the inverse transformation easily. It's not a square matrix. You also cannot multiply them according to the composite rules to get the composite transformation matrix, that means the overall transformation matrix. So in order to perform multiplications as well as finding the square inverse, we need to convert this into a square matrix. One very simple idea is that you add the last row of the identity matrix. Why identity matrix, because it means no change. Suppose that you add (0, 0, 0, 1) in the last row. This will basically lead you to a square matrix, four by four now, which will include rotations and translation together.

I'm trying to explain what is written over here. As you can see, we'll put the rotations, which is typically a three by three matrix. Then we add the translations x, y, z, and we append it with redundant information, (0, 0, 0, 1). This basically form a homogeneous transformation matrix. The purpose is to include both rotation and translation, at the same time, we need a square matrix. So the three by three matrix represent the orientations of the mobile frame, and the three by one vector represent the translation vector, which is actually the positions of the vector with respect to the fixed frame.

For the homogeneous coordinate, we will append a redundant information. Usually in the three dimensional space, you have only x, y, z, which is three by one. However, your transformation matrix now is four by four. Four by four matrix cannot multiply with three by one vector. Similarly, one very easy way out is that just add in a redundant information, one. These three is called the physical coordinate, while one is just a redundant information to enable matrix multiplication with vectors. This coordinate with appended one is called the homogeneous coordinates. The physical coordinates will still be the first three. By doing so, we will be able to multiply this with your homogeneous coordinates, with this redundant information, to perform matrix multiplication.

With this, we are now ready to define the fundamental rotations, as well as the fundamental translations in the homogeneous coordinate, and we call them fundamental homogeneous rotation and translation matrices.

Let us look at the fundamental homogeneous translation. By fundamental translation, it means only translation. By only translation, it means no rotation. No rotation means R is equal to identity matrix. We replace R by the identity matrix, means no rotation, and as for the translations, we'll just put everything together, x, y, z. You need not come up one for x, one for z separately, because you can account for all three using one vector, which is x, y, z, P1, P2, and P3. This basically means that we have derived a fundamental translation matrix. When you multiply a vector in a mobile frame by this translation matrix. For example, you can try, say, (0, 0, 3) with a redundant information. Using this, you can see that this is shifted, translated. And the last one will always give you one.

In addition to translation, we also will have rotations. Before that, let us look at one example on the translation, example 2.6. Suppose that you have a mobile frame, which is now translated five units along F1, negative three units along F2, that means move in the reverse directions of F2. Then the homogeneous transformation matrix is simply, putting the first one as five, second one as negative three, and there's no mention of the third one, means no translation along the third axis. If there's no translation, it means that you put zero. This is a homogeneous translation matrix in a four by four representation, homogeneous coordinate is one. Using this, we can multiply this transformation by this coordinate. The physical coordinate is the first three. This is a redundant information to enable matrix multiplication. From here, you can see that we can now perform matrix multiplication. Four by four matrix multiply by a vector, which is four by one, still give you a four by one vector. But to retrieve the information, you only look at the first three. And that give you the physical coordinates, which is five, negative three, and ten. This basically means that after this is translated, zero is translated by five units, so it become five. Zero is translated by negative three units, so it become negative three, and ten, there's no translation, so you remain at ten. So everything can be predicted mathematically by all these equation so that you can code it in the program as well, based on all these matrix and vector multiplication.

Just now, some students asked me about what is the requirement? Actually all these undergraduate matrix multiplications, you have to know. If not, nowadays quite easy, just search for videos, review of matrix multiplications, and it will lead you to some basic videos which can do a quick revision. But this is postgraduate course. We have to quickly move on to the postgraduate level.

Inverse translations. Suppose that you are given the other way around, given fixed coordinate, find the mobile coordinate. Then you need to find the inverse transformation. Same thing for inverse transformations, it means a matrix multiply by its inverse give you the identity matrix, basic definition of inverse matrix. From a transformation matrix point of view, it means that if you have translated by a three dimensional space, x, y, z, and you want to go back to the original form. How do you go back? You just translate backwards, so it's negative vectors. If I move by a certain distance in this direction, then you move back, you just reverse and move back to the original directions. This is intuitive, quite easy for you to remember. How do you remember that inverse of a fundamental translation matrix is to replace the original matrix by negative P. We look at this basic definition of inverse. T multiplied by T inverse is equal to I, and here it means no transformation. With this, you can easily take the inverse of this matrix if you want, by for example, put this negative five, this is positive five, and you can try, multiply them together to get an identity matrix. It means, you move by five, you move back by five. You move backward by three, you move forward by three, then you come back to the original position.

We have seen how to define a fundamental translation transformation in the homogeneous coordinate. Next, let us move on to fundamental rotation in the homogeneous coordinates. We call it fundamental homogeneous rotation. Now, by fundamental rotation, it means only rotation. By only rotation, it means no translation. Therefore, it's actually a very simple representation of our fundamental rotational matrices. R1, R2, R3, by adding a vector of zero on the right hand side, append it with a redundant information, last row of identity matrix. This means that I'm only performing rotation. I do not want to perform translation.

One example, suppose that you have a vector Q_m given in the mobile coordinate, (0, 0, 1, 0) is the physical coordinate. One, remember, is to add a redundant information to convert it into homogeneous coordinate. Suppose that this mobile frame, which is initially coincide with F, is now rotated by 45 degrees about the first axis of the fixed frame. This results in the homogeneous transformation matrix in this form. Firstly, no translation. Only rotation about the first axis of the fixed frame, that means F1, by angle pi over four. We're going to retrieve the R1, and then zero translations, appended with redundant information, last row of the identity matrix, to make it a fundamental rotational transformation. That means that given this rotational transformation, to interpret it, you always divide in this way. This will be a rotation. This will be translation, and this is redundant information just to convert this transformation matrix into a form which is feasible for matrix multiplication and finding the inverse transformation easily using square inverse.

Then you substitute pi over four into the general transformation matrix. You can show that it reduces to a particular transformation matrix, which is shown in the last row. Then using this matrix, you can multiply by any coordinates in the mobile frame to convert it into a coordinate in the fixed frame. Given any coordinates in the mobile frame, such as (0, 0, 1), you can convert it into a physical coordinate in the fixed frame, and it is equal to (0, negative 7.07, positive 7.07) after you perform matrix multiplication. So the requirement actually here is matrix multiplications and multiplications of matrix with a vector, which you should review if you have forgotten about them.

Next, what is the inverse rotational matrix in the homogeneous transformation? It's actually the same. Remember, I show it to you just now. Suppose that you want to rotate backward, you put negative angle. If you rotate forward by theta, you want to go back to the original position, you rotate backward. Mathematically, because of the properties of this transformation matrix, they are all sine, cosine, zeros, and one, it can be shown that you always reduces to the transpose of the matrix. Two ways of calculating the inverse of your rotational matrix. One, just substitute negative theta into the original matrix. Second way, just take the transpose of the original matrix. Both will give you the inverse matrix.

Let me do a quick review of what we have learned so far. Even though we have gone through quite a lot of things, it seems quite extensive, but it can be summarized into just one slide. This is a summary. We have learned three fundamental rotations, rotation about first axis, second axis, and the third axis, and we put it into a homogeneous coordinate so that we can perform matrix multiplication.

Firstly, this rotational matrix has this property that R1, for instance, it will be equal to the first row first column of the identity matrix. Actually, even though you need not memorize this, it can be quite easily identified by just transferring first row first column of the identity matrix here. Why is it so? Because it's rotating about the first axis. If you rotate about that axis, the axis does not change. The other two axis will change. Therefore, it's first row first column of the identity matrix, means no change. Whatever vector, multiplied by identity matrix, you'll remain the same. Whatever matrix, multiplied by identity matrix, you'll remain the same. It means no transformation.

Next, the remaining elements of R1, one very special property is that your off diagonal terms will always be equal to sine. Off diagonal term will always be sine. But the off diagonal terms, it can be positive or negative. How do we identify it? Negative one to the power of k. If k is equal to one, is negative one to the power of one is negative. The off diagonal term will be negative for R1. As for the rest, if there's no translation, fundamental rotation means rotation only, no translation. We put (0, 0, 0). Lastly, in order to make it a square matrix, you put (0, 0, 0, 1), which is the last row of a four by four identity matrix. By doing so, we can represent both rotation and translation, but in this case, no translation, only rotation.

Now, similarly, R2, you get the second row, second column of the identity matrix. You divide it into this form, put R2 here. R3, third row, third column. Again, it means what is not rotating. That axis are not rotating because it's rotating with respect to these two axis. That means they will remain the same. And the diagonal terms, as you can see, is always cosine. Always cosine theta. First, you fill out the identity matrix elements. R1, R2, R3, first, second, third. Then you fill out the diagonal terms, all cosine. Then fill out the off diagonal terms, all sine. Negative one to the power of k, is k equal to one, is k equal to two, is k equal to three. Odd, you give negative. Even, you give you positive. In fact, you don't need to multiply. You just check whether it's odd or even. Then you put positive or negative. Once you identify the one on top of the diagonal elements, the other one is always the reverse. If this is negative, the other one is positive.

This is just some characteristics of the matrix, which will help you to identify them. For example, after two days, if you understand the concept, even if I don't write this, you understand what is the meaning, because it's not rotating with respect to that first axis. Not to worry too much about that. Even though I go through this with you, you are not expected to memorize this, but it's useful for you to identify them if you need to use them.

Lastly, a fundamental translation does not consist of three matrices because you can represent it as a three by one vector, P1, P2 and P3. Which means altogether there are only four fundamental transformation matrix, which is defined in the homogeneous coordinate. For translations means no rotation. No rotation then we put identity matrix. The other way to look at it is that you put all the theta equal to zero. If you put all the theta equal to zero, you can see that all reduces to identity matrix because there's no rotation. Theta equal to zero means no rotation.

Together, these four, if you multiply them together, it can give you any rotation, any translation. Therefore, these are the fundamental homogeneous transformation matrices. Using them, we can identify composite one single transformation matrix, which is used to represent a sequence of rotation and translation.

I follow this law as well. Suppose that you have a fixed frame and the mobile frame which are initially coincide, no translation, no rotation. Then obviously it's equal to identity matrix. Identity matrix means no transformation, no change. Now, suppose that your mobile frame is translated or rotated, now it's more general. Just now we talk about rotation only. Now it can be either translation or rotation. If you have a rotation or translation with respect to the fixed frame, then you pre multiply. But however, if you have a transformation with respect to the mobile frame, then you post multiply. The rule is still the same, except that now you're dealing with these four by four matrices. Just now we're dealing with three by three matrix. Because we have put them into homogeneous coordinate, we can multiply them.

That means, imagine that you do not have this. Even though you have rotation and translation, you cannot multiply them together to form a composite matrix. That's the purpose of the homogeneous coordinate. It's just to enable you to perform matrix multiplication, and then as a result, you can program.

I will use two examples to show you this composite transformation matrix. In example 2.7, we have two frames, mobile frame, and fixed frame initially coincide. Suppose that we translate the mobile frame along the F2 by three units. Followed by a rotation about F3 by 180 degrees. After these two transformations, we want to find the locations of the mobile frame's M1, (1, 0, 0), with respect to the fixed frame. That means that if someone moving together with the mobile frame and is looking at the first axis, it's always fixed (1, 0, 0). But someone outside this mobile frame, looking at this M1 after this sequence of translation and rotations, we'll have different coordinates. I always use the example of the car. Someone inside the car, looking at a fixed thing, it's always fixed no matter how you rotate the car, how you turn it, how you translate it. But someone outside the car, looking at the same position, with respect to you will be a different location. We want to derive it mathematically.

So firstly, if they are initially coincide, you start with I. And if it's with respect to fixed frame, pre multiply. First one is a translation. We pre multiply by a translation transformation matrix. Second one is rotation with respect to the fixed frame as well. Therefore, we also pre multiply. Pre multiply is actually easier to understand because imagine you have a coordinate. You translate first. All these are with respect to the fixed frame. You translate first, then you rotate, so you operate translation first, followed by a rotation. But remember, this is with respect to the fixed frame.

By this, we can derive the details, translation about the second axis of the fixed frame by three units. This is what it means. What about first and third, no translation. We divide this matrix into this form. That is easier to interpret. The vector on the right means what, translate along x, zero, translate along y, which is F2, three, translate along z, which is F3, zero. Only translate along F2. And then there's no rotation. If there's no rotation, you put identity matrix. This form a fundamental translation matrix, three units along F2.

Okay, next, we have a rotation about F3. You divide this into this form, and rotation means no translation. Next, because it's with respect to F3, third row, third column will be identity matrix, no change. Follow by cosine theta. Diagonal term cosine theta. Press calculator, give you negative one. Off diagonal term sine 180 degree, always zero. In fact, here, we don't even need to know the sign because zero has no sign. I give you this matrix in this form.

Because both are 4 by 4, you can then multiply them together to get this composite. This composite matrix represent a sequence of transformation. In this case, translate then rotate with respect to the fixed frame. This is what we get.

Now, I'll show it to you graphically. By the way, after you have found this composite matrix, that means the overall matrix representing two transformation, then you can use it to find the locations of your M1, M1 means (1, 0, 0), to put it into a fixed frame. It means that if someone is outside, at this fixed frame, looking at M1, after a sequence of transformation, what will be the location? And you must also imagine that if you are moving together with the mobile frame, always sitting at that frame inside the car, when you look at M1, it's always (1, 0, 0). No change. Always one, zero, zero. But someone outside will be different.

So I'll show you the graphical illustration. Imagine that you have two frames which initially coincide. Coincide means identity matrix. No change. They are the same. Suppose that you translate the mobile frame by three units along F2. Firstly, you must identify where is F2 here. It means your mobile frame will move by three units. Assuming that this is three units, you will move to your right hand side by three units. After that, we will perform a rotation about F3 by 180 degree. Now, be careful. F3 is here. M3 is at the other side. It means that you have to rotate, with respect to F3 by 180 degree. 180 degree means flip to the other side. It is something like that, standing at a certain location, you stretch out your arm, then you rotate with respect to your body the other way round. 180 degree means, you will flip to the other side of the coordinate, with respect to F2. This is a graphic illustration of this sequence of transformation. Translate first, rotate 180 degree. Then it can come to this location.

Now, rather than finding this graphically, we can do it mathematically by this composite matrix. By multiplying this matrix by this physical location, we can actually know the locations of M1 with respect to the fixed frame. In fact, we're trying to find this vector, from the origin of the fixed frame to the tip of the vector, M1. Now, the calculations give us (negative 1, negative 3, 0). This is the physical coordinates, ignore the redundant information. Physically, it means that F1, M1 is negative with respect to F1. What this means is that because this is the other way round, and this is a unit vector. Remember that the M are the basis vectors. They are all unit vectors. So it is actually located at negative one, the other side, with respect to F1. Therefore, you see this as negative F1. And remember just now, it was translated by three, and then it rotated. So when you flip to the other side, you become negative three with respect to F2. Because it was translated by positive three, then flip to the other side become negative three. And you can see that is exactly this. Because M1 is on this plane, there's no translation upward. So therefore F3 is equal to zero. Therefore, our mathematical prediction is exactly the same as our graphical sketch.

Now, let me do it with respect to mobile frame. Just now I do it with respect to fixed frame. This example is fixed frame. You translate along F2 fixed frame by three units, then you rotate about F3, 180 degree, also fixed frame. Now we do it this way. We translate along M2. Just now we translate along F2 by three units. Now you replace F2 by M2. Previous example, we rotate about F3 by 180 degree. Now we rotate about M3, replace F3 by M3. The angle remain the same. In this case, it is with respect to mobile frame.

Let's look at the composite algorithm first. Before we look at it graphically, first, you have an identity matrix, because the first operation is with respect to the mobile frame, so you post multiply the translation matrix. Then you post multiply again because it's also with respect to the mobile frame. And therefore, because matrix multiplication do not commute, now we actually reverse the operation. I give you a slightly different transformation. If you compare the two, there will be a slight difference. This was negative. Now it become positive.

And similarly, we'd like to find out the locations of M1 with respect to the fixed frame after the two transformation. But now is with respect to the mobile frame. Let's look at it graphically. Imagine that these two frames are initially coincide. Identity matrix. And now you will first translate with respect to the mobile frame. The first one actually no difference because initially coincide. So whether you translate mobile or fixed is still the same. The first one looks the same. Now, the key point is the second one. You're now rotating about the mobile frame M3. It's here. The previous one was rotating about F3, that means you flip it 180 degree here. Now you're rotating about M3, which is here. And if you rotate about this axis by 180 degree, notice that this is mobile frame, not the fixed frame. So there's a difference now, and this caused it to be rotated 180 degree. By 180 degree means M2 point backward, M1 point backward. How about M3? No change. This explain why there's a third row, third column become the identity matrix. Because this one has no change. Only the other two will change.

If I show it to you graphically, I flip it, 180 degree. Now, it is different from the first one now because it is on the right hand side. The other one was on the left hand side over here. If you compare the two examples.

Now, using this matrix, I can also interpret it the other way around. Now suppose that you have two frames initially coincide. And suppose that you first rotate it, with respect to the third axis, then you translate. In terms of the mobile coordinate, you rotate it first, then you translate. You'll end up in exactly this position. So it's actually the reverse transformation. If you rotate first, then translate with respect to the fixed frame, be careful. Right now, you're interpreting it with respect to the fixed frame as the reverse operations, then you get the same transformation.

So I say again. The first one is with respect to mobile frame. You translate first, with respect to M2, then you rotate with respect to M3. You get this location. This is interpretation from the mobile frame. The other way to look at it is that you rotate first, with respect to F3, with respect to the fixed frame. Now, you rotate with respect to F3, then you translate along F2. You first rotate, then translate. You also get to the same position. But now it's with respect to the fixed frame. In other words, you just remember this: if it's with respect to fixed frame you pre multiply. If it's with respect to the mobile frame you post multiply, because it's inverse operation naturally.

Lastly, if a person sitting together with a mobile frame, looking at these positions is always one, zero, zero. To put it into homogeneous coordinates, we append redundant information one. This basically means that you can actually multiply this with this. Then you can get the physical coordinate with respect to the fixed frame.

Now, lastly, sometimes, if you need to calculate the inverse of the homogeneous transformation matrix, this is what you need to do. Firstly, rotation is easy to understand, transpose. Translations is negative P, but this involve both rotation and translations together. Therefore, you have R transpose as well. That means that negative P is in the mobile coordinates. Then you have R transpose to invert it back to the original position. In fact, one way to check it is that you multiply by the original matrix. And due to the fact that R transpose R is equal to identity matrix, this will be equal to a four by four identity matrix. This is how we find the inverse transformation matrix in the homogeneous coordinate.

Let us look at one example. In this example, we are looking at the reverse. We have a mobile frame and a fixed frame. And suppose that we have this transformation matrix, which map mobile frame into the fixed frame. This is mobile frame with respect to the fixed frame. Find the homogeneous coordinate transformation, which do the other way around. Mobile frame with respect to fixed frame into fixed with respect to mobile. That means basically it's just asking you to find the inverse matrix given the matrix, given T find T inverse. And then use it to find the location of the F2 with respect to the mobile frame. Because the first one give you the location with respect to the fixed frame, the inverse give you the location with respect to the mobile frame.

And to find the inverse of this matrix, remember that you need not calculate the determinant and the adjoint matrix. Just do this. Divide the original matrix into this form. This will be your rotational transformation. Take the transpose. Transpose means row become column, column become row. Then after that, reverse the sine of P. Multiply by R transpose, and that actually give you this vector over here. That will be the inverse matrix. There's a very fast way of calculating it. If you try to multiply these two together, you see that you need this.

Lastly, given vectors in the fixed frame, (0, 1, 0) F2, F2 means that it is a basic vector along the second axis, so it is (0, 1, 0). Append it with a redundant information so that you can multiply with the matrix. After multiplying it, ignore this redundant information to retrieve the physical coordinates. It basically means that if you are interested in the location of F2, with respect to M1, that will be the physical coordinates. M1 is negative one, M2 is zero, M3 is negative two.

Graphically, this is how it looks like. If you look at F2 the other way around. Previously, we always looking from the perspective of the fixed frame. Now it is the other way around. It is someone inside the mobile frame looking at the fixed frame. In particular, the tip of F2 of the fixed frame, what will be the coordinate? From here, you can actually see that this is M1. And you look at this, because this is unit vector has a length of one. And because there's a physical translation of two, therefore, this is actually negative one. Graphically, this is given to you. That means you just look back. This will be this location. Negative one because it's in the other direction of M1. And then M2 and M3, M2 is equal to zero because it's on this white screen, no translation along M2. Everything is on the white screen. Lastly, M3 is equal to negative two because M3 is downward by two. Therefore it is equal to negative two. This is just to check it graphically, and this graph is given. We derive this mathematically, based on multiplications of matrix by a vector. And then we check against this graph to see whether is it consistent or not. In fact, we can get the locations of F2 with respect to the mobile frame. Someone sitting here, looking at this F2, and he will see this position with respect to here.

Today's lecture is actually to review some of the matrix basic mathematics, in particular, coordinate transformation in matrix form that were required to model the kinematics of a robot systems. So next week, then we'll start the actual topics on kinematics. Meaning that how do we make use of all these transformation matrices? In fact, here you can see that there's a fixed coordinate, there's a mobile coordinate, and there are multiple joints. Which means that there are multiple coordinates. When each joint move, the mobile frame will move with respect to the previous coordinate. So there's a sequence of transformations between them, until we reach the final end effector frame. We'll make use of the concept that we have learned, the transformation matrices in homogeneous coordinates, as well as the composite rules to derive a transformation matrix for the manipulator as the functions of the joint variables. So that given the joint angles, given theta1, theta2, theta3, theta4, theta5, theta6, we can derive a model to calculate the position and orientation of the end effector, that means the mobile frame attached to the end effector with respect to the fixed frame, which is basically your base. Sometimes we call this two frame, a mobile frame with respect to the base frame, which is the fixed frame.

All the robot commands are issued with respect to the fixed frame. Where is your position, which is the translation, with respect to the fixed frame? How your end effector is oriented, rotation, with respect to the fixed frame, which we'll discuss in the next lectures.

I've gone through quite a lot of materials. So we'll stop here today. Every week, please review today's lectures. It will be recorded as well. So you can watch through the videos again to review it before you come for the next lecture. Every week, if you do the same, you'll be all right. And if you have any questions you can always discuss with me. Thank you.
