Eight?  Mm. Okay.  Good  evening,  everyone. So  we're  going  to  start  today's  lecture. Now,  last  week,  we  started  to  introduce a  linear  programming  problem. And  we  basically  introduce a  standard  form,  right? I  hope  you  guys  still  remember. We  also  talk  about  the  one your  number  variable  is not  too  big,  for  example  two. You  can  use  a  graphic  way  to  do  it. Try  to  recall  how the  graphic  way  is  carried  out. In  case  that  the  variable  number  is  too  big, then  we  may  have  to consider  using  a  syplex  method. So  we  briefly  in  introduce  a synplex  method  at the  end  of  the  last  week's  lecture. Today  we  focus  on concentrate  on  the  synplex  method. Now,  try  to  recall that  the  linear  programming  problem. And  they  have  a  standardized  term  here. So  we  have  z  equals  to c  transpose  x  c  transpose  is  a  row  vector, and  the  subject  to  A  x  equals  B, where  x  is  non  negative, and  also  importantly  the  B, The  B  also  need  to  be  non  negative. Actually,  this  one  is  reflected in  your  simplex  method, one  of  the  room  related  to  this  one. Be  aware  that  the  A  x  equals  B  actually  is after  adding  the  actual  variables like  a  snack  variable, when  you  have  a  less  than  equal  to or  the  so  called  suplus  variable. When  you  have  bigger  than  or  equal  to, or  you  have  a  so  called  artificial  variable, when  you  have  equality  there, when  you  can  sra  has  equality. Now,  we  try  to  recall  why  we  need  to introduce  the  snack  variable, the  suplus  variable, and  the  artificial  variables. Now,  among  those  actual  variables, the  ditial  guess, the  so  called  dital  basic  physical  solution, will  rely  on  the  snack  variable and  the  artificial  variables. And  all  other  variable will  be  set  value  equal  zero. That's  how  we  talk  about  the  x  zero  here. X  zero  is  the  collection of  snack  variable  and  artificial  variables, which  will  carry  non  zero  values. All  other  variable  not  appearing  in  x  zero will  be  assigned  with  value  zero  initially. So  now  try  to recall  what  x  zero  really  means. The  collection  of  snack  variable  and the  artificial  variable  appearing in  your  cost  function,  okay? You  know,  it's  going  to  be  appearing  here. All  right.  So  now, with  this  understanding  of  the  basic  setup. We're  going  to  apply  the  so called  the  Synplex  method. We're  going  to  first  start  with maximization  easy  for  me  to  say,  right? Then  we  come  back  to  the  minimization  part. Last  week,  I  asked  whether  you  guys go  back  and  think  about why  we  have  this  kind  of  table. Later  on,  when  we  talk  about the  sensitive  analysis,  we  may  use  it. I  hope  that  you  guys  actually  spend some  time  to  think about  where  this  table  come  from. Let  me  just  try  to  I'll just  use  the  middle  screen  middle  screen  and. Let  me  see  whether  I  can  lower  the  power. Is  too  bright  can  see  it. Why  you  solve  we  need the  equations,  everybody  knows,  right? If  I'm  going  to  maximize, I  I'm  going  to  maximize  z equals  two,  C  transpose  x. Then  you  subject  the  so  called  A  x  equals  B. Of  coe  has  been  all  non. Now,  take  a  look  at  these  two  guys. Now,  ideally,  I  can move  this  guy  to  the  left  hand  side, so  I'm  going  to  have  a  z minus  c  transpose  x  equal  zero. Now  I  have  another construing  basic  equality  there. I  got  two  equations  there. Z,  the  variable,  we  don't  really  care. If  you  take  a  look  at  the  table  there, take  out  this  table  here, look  at  the  leftmost  screen. The  first  one  basically  corresponding  to Ax  equals  b  e  times  x  equal  b. Forget  about  the  x  transpose  should  be  x. Now,  the  bottom  one  is  what? The  bottom  one,  forget  about the  C  zero  transpose  here, this  term  because  this  one  is  talking  about the  ox  the  snack  variable or  variable  appearing  in  your  cost  function. If  you  don't  have  these  things, you  only  focus  on  the  first  one, negative  c  transpose, and  this  one  will  become  a  zero. What  does  that  mean?  This  one actually  corresponding to  your  first  equation. Z  minus  c  transpose  x  equals  zero. This  term  becomes  zero, is  correspond  to  this  guy. And  then  I  simply  ignore  the  z  there  now. I  only  write  down neck  c  transpose  I  put  here, equal  C  transpose  times  x  equals  zero,  here. I  basically  solving  equations. The  simplex  method  is  always trying  to  solve  equations. Now,  in  case  that  your  cost  function  does actually  have  some  snack  variable. And  the  art  variable because  some  sort  of a  penalty  turn  will  appear. You  can  actually  aid C  zero  transpose  and  you  put  like  x  here,  Bf. The  C  zero  transpose  will choose  a  snack  variable. Basically,  you  can  see  that, the  artificial  variables,  right? But  the  question  said, what  should  I  put  here? Should  I  plus  or  minor  in  terms  of  penalty? I  want  to  penalize  this  one when  you  do  maximization. What  is  the  penalty  you're  going  to  put? Supposed  to  be  plus  or  should  be  minors. All  right.  Okay.  You  need to  maximize  something, but  as  a  penalty, there  has  to  be  subtract  law. You  have  to  minor. If  the  minors,  then  this  term  will going  become  plus  C  zero,  he. That's  how  you  see  that C  zero  transport  coming  out  plus  that  thing. But  what  happened  to  the  A  and  the  B  there? Now,  tell  me  what  is  ital. When  I  first  construct  a  table, that  table  is  a  itial  table. That  means  it,  what  is the  c0t  this  x  give  you  equals  to  what? You  know,  initially,  all  the  slack  variable will  be  assigned  with  one. Or  the  artificial  variable  value will  also  be  careful  no  how. Take  a  look  at  the  table  here. Give  the  example.  You  pay  attention  to how  give  an  example  here. Just  take  a  look  at  this  example,  right? Here  you  got  two  snack  variables,  x, x  four,  initially, they  are  all  treated  as  a  basic  variable. Therefore,  you  can  see  the  value  of x  determined  by  the  b  value here  look  at  the  column  here. The  column  corresponding  to  x, there's  only  one  entries, non  zero  is  one  here. X  four  is  another  snack  variable, who  value  six. Now,  if  I  want  to  add  these  two  guys into  my  cose  function,  what  should  I  do? The  simple  way  is  that  I  will create  a  vector  c  zero, such  that  they  will  only  add  up these  two  row  here because  this  two  row  one  plus  zero  still  one, x  four  plus  zero  plus  one  still  one  there. Then  multiply  basically  the  C  zero, they  will  end  up  with  a  constant. But  that  effect  basically  like  you 86  plus  12  now. That's  how  this  art  to  think  about. This  is  actually  quite  important. This  is  how  the  negative  c0tb  coming  out. All  right.  Okay.  Now  think  about  this  term, the  second  term  here. Tink  about  this  second  term here  is  actually  due  to the  introduction  of the  snack  variable  and artificial  variable  in  your  cost  function. When  you  add  these  terms  here  at  the  back. Essentially  change  the  value Because  if  you  don't  add  this  guy, you  have  a  zero  here. Now,  if  you  add  this  one  back  in, you  are  actually  adding  some  value  coming. But  what  is  the  value  specifically? You  know  the  snack  variable  value is  uniquely  determined  by  the  B  value. You  have  to  choose  the  right  entry  and that  right  entry  is  specified  by  C  zero. The  C  zero  will  pick. Among  those  variables, which  one  should  be  ad  back. Just  remember  that  in  this  table, in  case  your  cost  function  contains a  snack  variable  or  the  artfal  variable, you  will  introduce  a  C  zero, which  will  change  the  ditial  value of  your  function  z  here. Okay.  If  you  don't  have  this  term, you  know  the  z  minus  c  transpose x  is  always  zero  initially. Right?  Okay.  Then  after  that, basically, you've  got  the  two  equation  here  now, and  whatever  you  do  the  cancellation, elemental  role  operation, you  are  essentially change  the  value  of  this  one, corresponding  value  here  now. Un,  the  maximum  is  reached. You  try  to  recall  that, under  what  conditions the  maximum  will  be  reached. What  is  the  condition  we  specify? Now,  take  a  look.  Under  what  conditions the  max  will  be  reached. When  you  do  maximization. You  look  at  the  the  coefficient. For  example,  if  I  say  z  equals  two, say  nine  x  one  plus  ten  x  two. If  you  look  at  this  guy,  it is  very  clear  this  is not  reaching  the  maximum  yet  because I  can  keep  increasing  x1x2. But  if  two  guys  become  a  negative, the  coefficient  will  become  a  negative. Then  you  know  that  you are  not  able  to  increase  anymore. For  example,  if  this  guy  is a  negative  nine  x  one  and  minus  ten  x  two, you  know  that  you  are  not  able to  increase  this  one  further  now, because  x1x2  are  all  nng  negative. I  cannot  by  increasing  x1x  value, you  keep  increasing  the  cost  function  value. If  you  move  this  guy  back  to  this  one, you  have  a  z  plus nine  x  one  plus  ten  x  two  equals  zero. That  basically  means  that  whatever, C,  the  last  row  is all  non  negative,  you  stop. Because  you  are  not  able  to increase  the  cost  function  value  further  now. Okay?  That's  actually very  intuitive  explanations, the  stopping  criteria. Okay,  you  know,  So  um  If  you  say  I  mean, I  cannot  remember  these  things, then  you  just  memorize  the  procedure. When  the  last  row after  elementary  rule  operations, the  last  the  coefficient all  become  non  negative,  you  stop. That  means  the  cost  function cannot  increase  further. You  reach  the  maximum. As  long  as  one  of  the  guy  is  negative, that  means  just  like  this  situation  here  now, O  of  the  guy  actually  still  negative. That  means  that  one  of the  guy  still  positive, that  means  you  are  still  able  to increase  along  that  variable. Keep  moving  forward.  That's  actually the  fundamental  reason behind  the  synplex  method. Now,  once  we  understand  the  table  there, if  I  do  the  minimization, If  I  want  to  do  minimization here,  for  example, if  I  want  to  minimize, I  will  basically  just  a z  negative  C  transpose  x  la. Because  I  just  put  the  negative  one  in  front, to  transform  the  maximization into  minimization. Then  I  will  construct  the  table. This  basically  synimization  table. That's  how  the  so  called a  positive  C  transpose  come  into  picture. Because  I'm  going  to  move this  one  into  the  left  hand  side, you  have  a  z  plus  c  transpose  x  equals  zero. Then  what  happened  to  this  guy? C  zero  transpose  this  one. Because  when  you  do  minimization, how  do  you  penalize  your  term? You  want  to  do  minimization. Then  if  I  want  to  aid the  penalized  term  there,  where  should  I  do? For  this  guy  here,  if  I  want to  aid  the  panalze  terms  here, should  I  plus  or  should  I minus  the  c0t  times  x? Which  one  should  I  add? Plus  minus. If  you  want  to  minimize  something, but  your  penalty  means  you are  intend  to  increase  the  value. That  means  that  you  have  to  plus. You  have  to  plus  something. Then  you  move  this  whole thing  into  the  left  and  side, you  have  a  z  p  c  transpose  x  minus  CLT. That's  why  you  have the  minus  CT  coming  into  pi. That's  the  very  intuitive  explanations. How  do  you  construct  the  first  table. The  introducing  of  the  c0t A  c  c  zero  transpos  A  and  C  zero  transpos  B is  due  to  the  ilitie basic  solution  you  choose. You  will  set  all  the  snack  variables  value equals  to the  corresponding  constant  term  in  B, set  all  other  variables  value  to  zero. That's  how  the  C  zero transpos  A  come  into  picture, C  zero  transpo  b  come  into  picture. Okay.  Build  things  in  mind. Then  once  you  have  these  two  equations  there, one  guy  here,  one  guy  here,  don't  know. O  here,  one  guy  here. This  one  is  cose  function transposed,  transformed. The  other  one  is  cont.  Ax  should be  equal  to  b  s.  It's not  zero,  should  be  here. Speak  here. Then  you  are  essentially  just  use elementary  row  operation do  the  gaussian  elimination. You  cancel  the  variables, and  keep  moving  forward. That's  how  the  synplex  method, the  key  idea  works. Of  course,  they  have  some  procedures  now. We  try  to  recall how  the  procedure  really  works. We're  going  to  just  use the  maximization as  a  illustration  because  maximization, typically,  all  the  constraint is  written  as  a  less  than  equal  to. You  will  only  introduce  the  snack  variables. The  snack  variables  is  good because  the  snack  variables  will not  require  you  to  add a  penalty  term  in  your  course  function. That's  fantastic. The  C  zero  transpose basically  just  a  zero  vector. You  don't  need  to  worry  about  at  all. We  just  use  the  maximization  as  illustration. Now,  in  this  cases  after you  create  the  first  table. Now,  the  first  step  in your  Synplex  iteration  stage  is  that  you look  for  the  last  row. Look  for  the  last  row  here. Look  for  the  last  row  of  this  guy. This  is  just  a  single  roll. Look  at  because  x  is  a  vector, include  the  list  of  the  all  the  variables. Look  at  any  variable corresponding  entries  is  negative  or  not. If  you  have more  than  one  negative  value  in  it, you  choose  the  most  negative  one. The  Some  snatually  ask, why  is  the  most  negative? If  I  choose  the  least  negative, it  still  okay  or  not? Well,  I  mean,  ideally,  yes, it  still  works  because  as  long  as  negative, that  means  that  you  have  a  intention  you have  trend  to  keep  increasing  the  value. The  matter  of  just  whether  you  increase  the maximum  or  minimum,  nobody  knows. In  these  cases,  they are  essentially  setting  a  rule  there. Each  eration,  I  will  follow  the  same  rule, right  hand  rule  or  left  hand  rule, everybody  follow  the  same  rule. Then  when  I  jump  in among  those  optimal  values, or  actually  among  the  basic  values, we  will  always  go  one  direction. I  will  never  come  back. For  example,  I  find one  solution,  next  reation, I  find  new  one,  and  the  third  time I  come  back  to  my  previous  solution, this  will  never  happen. It  will  keep  moving  forward. Keep  changing  until  you reach  the  true  optimal  values. Choosing  this  one  basically  fix  the  rule. We'll  give  you  the  so called  convergence  of  your  method. Okay?  So  you  choose the  most  negative  one  because  in  many  cases, this  one,  indeed,  sped  up  the  computation. But  not  always. Then  the  next  step  is very  critical.  All  right. It's  very  critical.  What  they  do  is  that along  the  I'm  going to  actually  use  the  example. Last  week,  I  gave  just  a very  brief  introduction  there. Now  I'm  going  to  actually explain  why  this  is  the  case  here. In  these  cases,  in  this  initial  table, you  already  identify the  most  negative  entry  in  the  last  role, then  the  corresponding  variable  x  one. Previously  must  be  a  basic  variable, supposed  to  be  a  non  basic  variable, must  become  a  basic  variable  next  time. Then  you  need  to  decide which  entry  will  become  my  next  p  vert. That  means  the  value  become  one, and  all  other  entry  in this  column  will  become zero.  How  do  I  decide? Then  you  calculate  the  ratio  here. The  first  ratio  is  12/3, give  you  four,  6/2, give  you  three,  you  choose  a  small  one. Why  I  choose  a  small  one,  not  a  bigger  one. You  choose  a  small  one because  you  can  guarantee that  when  you  do the  elementary  rule  operation, after  elementary  rule  operation, and  all  this  column  will  still maintain  non  negative  half. Because  it  smallest  one. When  you  multiply,  you'll multiply  the  value  on  this  column. When  you  multiply  this  column to  the  cancellation  stuff, you  can  guarantee  the  outcome, the  resulting  new  constant  variable in  the  B  column,  it'll  be  non  negative. I  need  to  maintain  the  B column  to  be  non  negative. This  is  actually  the  reason  why I  choose  the  minimum  value. This  one  actually  legitimate  hole. The  first  one  choosing  the  most negative  one  is  not  necessary. But  this  one  must  be. I  need  to  maintain  the  B  column to  be  all  non  negative. This  is  actually  very  important, because  we're  going  to  come  back  to see  the  sensitive  analysis, we  will  use  this  property. In  the  standardized  LP  formulation, all  this  constant  term  B  column must  be  all  non  negative. I  cannot  have  a  negative  value. Otherwise,  you  have  to  transform your  corresponding  constraint  again. Multiply  negative  one  in  front, in  both  side  at  both  sides or  whatever  you  do,  right. So  make  sure  that  this  column, they  are  all  non  negative.  Okay? Now,  you  see  the  second  critical  steps. The  rest  is  just  a  continue  apply,  right? You  just  apply  the  elementary  row  operation. So  over  all  the  entries in  a  column  you  were  chosen  previously. So  For  that  previous  example, you  can  see  that  now  because this  guy  has  the  smallest  ratio. Therefore,  I  will  make  this  entry, and  also  the  column  corresponding to  the  most  negative  entry  at  the  last  row. I'm  going  to  make  this  entry  become my  next  p  ord  corresponding  to  x  one. X  one  will  become  a  basic  variable. What's  the  basic  variable  about? Because  then  after  you  finish the  iteration  from  the  table, you  first  identify  which  variable is  a  basic  variable. The  basic  variable  is symbolized  by  the  so  called  p  d  column. That  means  that  all  the  entries  below this  variable  value  zero except  for  one  entry, which  whose  value  is  one. Then  how  do  I  read  the  basic  variables  value? I  will  simply  locate  this  pivot  entry. Then  horizontally,  I  will  find the  corresponding  constant  term. That  means  I  can  immediately  read  the x  one  will  take  value  three. And  x  three  is  also a  basic  variable  because  this  column, there's  only  one  entres  nu  zero. Actually  value  is  one,  or  other  entries  zero. I'm  going  to  directly  read the  corresponding  constant  value  three  here, and  assign  the  three  to  the  X  three. For  the  other  two,  they  are  not corresponding  to  the  pip  column. They  are  called  non  basic  variables  and the  value  of  the  u  basic  variables are  all  set  to  zero. Then  you  have  another  pasile  solution  there. At  this  moment,  you're going  to  start  to  check. Should  I  stop  now? Or  should  I  continue. You  look  at  all  these  entry  of  the  last  row except  for  the  last  entry  hold  because the  last  entry  is  supposed to  record  the  value  of  z. You  know  the  z function  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning. Basically  the  function  value. Except  for  the  right  most  entry, the  all  other  entries  must  be  non  negative. Then  you  know  that  the  cost  function  value will  not  be  increased  further  now. Okay.  I  already explained  why  this  is  the  case. So  then  you  stop.  You  finished. Last  week,  I  already  showed that  in  this  cases, your  solution  is  always  jumping  around, jumping  around  the  vertice. Typically,  this  could  be your  so  called  physical  region,  no. Could  be  your  physical  region  there. Maybe  it's  a  high  dimension,  doesn't  matter. Okay. Usually  what  we  start  is  that this  could  be  your  itial  solutions  there. Where  you  can  see  that all  these  original  variables in  your  cost  function, possibly  will  be  set  zero, and  then  the  x  zero  will  be set  value  correspond  to  some  sort  of  a  B. Something  in  the  bla, you  can  write  in  this  manner. No  no,  actually.  This  x zero  is  a  snack  variables or  the  artificial  variables, then  this  guy  the  value will  directly  taken  from  the  B. I  write  the  vary  in  formal  la. That  means  that  basically, this  guy  can  choose  non  zero  values. But  all  the  original  variable  typically  will choose  zero  because  they  are neither  snack  nor  artificial. You  always  start  from  somewhere. In  a  two  dimension  case,  for  example,  x1x2. Whatever  you  choose,  you always  start  from  here. Always  start  from  the  origin, zero,  zero,  here. Then  every  iteration,  you're  going  to either  move  upward  or  upward  or  downward, you're  going  to  move  to  the  next  vertex. Now,  which  one  you  choose? Well,  it's  I  cannot  tail. Even  you  choose  the  most negative  one  doesn't  mean  that  you  must go  clockwise  or  counter  clockwise. It  doesn't  you  don't  know. But  once  you  know  the  next  one, then  you'll  roughly  know  the  direction  now. Then  they  will  keep moving  in  the  same  direction. All  right.  They  always  move  like  this. They  will  never  come  back. They  were  never  coming  back. That  will  jump  back. They  will  keep  moving  moving until  you  reach  the  optimal  one. Are  you  sure  that the  optimal  one  must  be one  of  the  vertices  for  sure, because  of  the  LP's  property, Bus  LP  is  a  convex  problem  there. So  the  optimal  value  must  be  on  the  boundary. Okay.  And  if  the  solution  is  unique, it  must  be  on  one  single  vertex. Okay,  that's  what  we  already  proved.  Okay. So  yeah,  that's  actually  very, very  straightforward,  the  Synplex  procedure. Okay?  So  now  let's take  a  look  at  another  example. Keep  this  We're  going to  try  a  few  examples.  Then  you  will  see. Before  we  move  on  to  the  so called  duality  serum  d. In  this,  you  can  see that  I'm  going  to  still  do  maximization. That's  good.  Be  maximization, the  constraint  typically  is less  than  equal  to  here. That  means  I  do  not introduce  the  Surplus  variable. I  do  not  introduce  the  artificial  variable. Only  the  snack  variable  is  enough. In  this  case,  the  snack variable  will  never  never be  placed into  your  cost  function  at  a  penalty  term. You  don't  need  that.  Maximization  is the  simplest  formula  you  can  handle. We  would  like  to  handle. Now,  with  this  one,  I'm  going  to add  two  snack  variables. The  number  of  snack  variables determined  by  the  number  of  constraints, except  for  the  very  tedious  one, the  non  negative  of  the  variables. This  one  we  don't  consider  at  all. We  consider  any  other  constrains. The  number  of  any  other  constrains  will determine  the  number  of  snack  variable. Snack  variable  you're  going  to  introduce. I  got  two  here. That  means  I'm  going  to  introduce two  more  snack  variables, X  three  and  X  four. Then  I'm  going  to  start  to  construct the  table  now.  Use  this  one  here. You  can  see  that  I'm  going to  see  zero  supposed  to  be collection  off coefficients  in  your  cose  function, corresponding  to  your  step  error because  it  both  a  zero, so  the  c  zero  transpos  zero. You  don't  need  to  consider  this  two  terminal. C  zero  transport  times  A, zero,  C  zero  transport  time  B,  zero  as  well. You  have  a  very  simple  ital  table. Then  you  can  easily write  on  here  now.  Here  you  go. The  first  row  is  always  a  record, all  these  variables  appearing  in  your  system. The  first  two  are  the  variable initially  appearing  in  your  course  function. And  the  third  and  fourth  variables are  the  introduced  new  snack  variables. The  last  column  is  always the  constant  term  B  in  your  constraint. All  right.  So  now  you've  got  two  constrains. That's  why  you  have  a  two  role  here, and  pay  attention  to the  coef  designing  low  because the  first  equation  only  x  is  introduced, x  four  al  coefficient  zero. The  second  const  x  f  is  introduced, x  is  coefficient  zero,  fine. The  last  row  basically  is a  record  the  coefficient of  your  cose  function. Record  that  previously. When  we  write  down  the  maximization, I  write  z  minus  c  transpose  x  equal  zero. Therefore,  you  typically  take  a  netric  one. Put  a  negative  one  in  front  of the  coefficient  of the  original  cose  function, put  them  in  the  table,  ok? So  that's  how  the  rule  works. That's  why  you  have  a  negative one  negative  one  because the  previous  cost  function actually  is  X  one  plus  X  two. Now  I  have  the  negative  one  in front  negative  one  here. Now  I  finish  the  first  table. In  this  table,  I  can  immediately  come up  with  the  first  feasible  solution. Since  x  three  and  x  four  are the  basic  variable  now because  within  the  column  here, there's  only  one  entry  has a  non  zero  value,  which  is  one. Therefore,  I'm  going  to  directly set  x  value  equal  five. You  see  you  go  to  the  pivot  entry, then  you  horizontally  go  to  the  right  most, and  that  value  constant  value is  the  value  assignment  to  the  x  three. Similarly,  x  four  will  take  value  four. Then  because  x1x2  are  non  basic  variables, because  the  column  has  a  lot of  non  zero  entry  state. Then  I  will  simply  set  x  one equal  zero,  x  to  equal  zero. I  have  my  first  solution  sm. If  you  take  a  look  at the  graphic  physical  region, you  know  that  this  choice will  make  you  starting  from  the  origin. Start  always  starting  from  region. Then  I'm  going  to  carry out  the  iteration  now. I  have  the  first  tablet, and  when  I  check  the  last  row, I  know  that  I  got  two  entry  a  negative. That  means  I  can  still increase  the  cost  function  value. When  I  do  maximization. Then  I  will  choose the  negative  mo  because this  both  are  the  same, so  I  just  randomly  pick  one. Okay.  That's  why  I  said, the  most  negative  things  is  not  really critical.  Last  as  a  why. I  got  identical  choices there,  you  to  pick  one. When  you  pick  one,  for  example, you  choose  X  one, X  one  now  is  going  to become  your  next  basic  variable. S  x  y  is  going  to  become  next  basic  variable, and  the  total  number  of basic  variable  is  always  a  fixed. If  one  more  variable  become  a  basic  variable, then  the  previous  basic variable  previous  basic  variable must  be  convert  back  to  the  non  basic  one. The  question  is  that  between x  three  and  x  four, which  one  should  become  a  non  basic. Then  what  I  need  to  do  is  that  I need  to  decide  within  these  two  entries, the  entry  one  entry  two, which  one  should  become  next  pivot. If  I  become  a  pivot  entry, I  know  that  the  corresponding previous  pivot  entry  will  be  gone. That  means  if  this  guy  become  a  pivot  entry, and  then  the  x  four  corresponding, this  entry  will  become  a  non  pverd  entry. The  column  become  a  non  pd. If  I  choose  this  one  as  my  p  entry, next  P  entry,  then  this  guy  must  be  gone. In  any  cases,  one  variable  enters become  a  basic  variable, then  there's  must  be one  basic  variable  leave  the  set, become  a  non  basic  to  maintain the  same  number  of basic  variables,  during  iteration. So  now,  in  this  case  is  who, because  this  guy  ratio  is  smaller, ideally,  and  this  will become  my  pivot  entry  there. So  I'm  going  to  use  element  role operational,  just  do  skating. I'll  make  this  value  become  one. Okay.  So  now  I'm  going  to carry  out  element  role  operation E.  I  don't  know  why  to  keep  actually.  Yeah. That's  very  strange. Yeah.  Now  I'm  going  to  make the  other  two  entry become  zero  in  the  same  column  there. It's  very  straightforward, everybody  should  know  how  to  do  that, because  it's  just  a  basic  need  algebra. You  have  the  elementary  row  operation, you  apply  it  and  you  can  see, these  two  entry  now  become  zero. Of  course,  all  other  entry  will  be affected  by  this  elementary  row  operation. After  iteration  here, next,  of  course,  you  have  to  read. A,  what's  my  solution  now,  next  solution. You  first  identify  the  basic  variables. You  look  for  the  pivot  column. That  means  a  column  contains only  one  non  zero  value. I  got  two  here,  y  is  here,  y  is  here  now. I  got  x  one  and  x three  now  become  a  basic  variable. That  means  I'm  going  to  set  x  one  value, choose  the  p,  identify the  peak  entry  a  pivot  entry, go  left  most  along  the  same  row, and  that  constant  value is  the  value  assignment  to  x  one, x  one  will  become  two. Then  go  for  the  second basic  variable  x  three, and  you  identify  the  three, it's  going  to  be the  value  assigned  to  x  three. Now,  x  two,  x  four  are non  basic  one  because  they  are  not corresponding  to  the  p  vert  column  here, their  value  will  be  assigned  as  zero. Now  you  finish  the  second  iteration. You've  got  the  second feasible  solution  there. If  you  carefully  check  the  x  one, because  now  the  solution  is  actually  x  one equal  to  two  x  equals  zero,  20. If  you  use  a  graphic  way  to  check, they  actually  move  to  the  neighboring  vertex. Look  like  this  one  move horizontally,  horizontally. Be  X  X  one  now  change  increase  value, but  the  X  two  still  maintains  zero. Now  you  can  say,  Okay,  now, after  this  second  iteration,  I  realized  that, final,  I'm  still  having one  entry  In  your  last  row,  is  negative. No  means  I  still  have a  possibility  to  increase  the  X  two  value, that  will  increase the  cost  function  value  there. I  have  to  continue  iteration. Now,  in  these  cases, I  have  two  entries, which  one  should  become  a  p  bird. I  have  to  carry  out this  ratio  checking  again. Right  now  there's  only  one  entry negative  low,  so  there's  no  other  choice. X  two  will  be  next  basic  variable. But  if  the  X  two  is  going to  enter  as  a  basic  variable, then  between  x  one and  x  three,  one  of  the  guy  must  go. One  of  them  must  become  a  non  basic. No  question  which  one  should  go. You  have  to  carry  out  the  ratio  check again  and  realize  that  this  guy, this  one  will  become  my  next  Pbd  entry. That  means  my  X  three  will  be  kicked  out. X,  this  entry  will  not  be  p  d  anymore, so  X  three  become  a  non  basic  variable in  the  next  iteration. Now  I  can  continue  because  this  one  will become  one  here  after  the  skating  down. Then  I  can  carry  the  emt  role  operation, make  these  two  guys  become zero.  The  continue. So  then  it's  not  too  complicated  to  apply. After  you  do  these  two  elementary row  operation  here, you  add  a  multiple  of  one  row  to another  row  here  to  the  same  type  of  ruler. You  make  this  X  two  column  there, this  two  entry  below the  entry  become  all  zero. Now,  you  got  another  solution  here. Now  you  read,  well, X  one  and  X  two  now  become  a  basic  variable, where  the  X  one  is  going  to take  a  value  of  5/3. My  X  two  is  going  to  take  a  value  of  2/3. I  have  my  new  basic  solution. X3x4  become  a  non  basic. I'm  going  to  simply  assign  zero  to  them. I  have  a  final  fasal  solution  now. But  at  this  point,  I check  every  entry  in  the  last  row, and  they  are  all  non  negative. Then  I  know  that  there's  no  chance  for  me  to keep  improving  the  cost  function any  further.  I  will  stop  here. I'm  going  to  read  the  right  right  most  entry in  the  last  row  as the  optimal  function  values. Okay?  So  for these  simple  problems,  you  stop  here  now. There's  no  further  improvement. But  in  many  cases,  you have  to  do  it  several  times. Just  be  patient.  I  think the  syplex  if  you  going  to  do  manually, you  have  to  really  be  patient,  ok? But  you  have  to  believe  yourself. It  definitely  going  to  eventually  converge. Go  to  the  best  solutions  then, as  long  as  you  apply  the  rule  correctly. Okay?  Last  time  I mentioned  that  in  case you  have  artificial  variable, and  then  you're  going  to  actually introduce  a  penalty  terms. Try  to  recall  why  we're  going  to introduce  penalty  term  Because artificial  variable  actually  is going  to  deal  with equality  there.  Try  to  recall  that. While  you  have,  I constrain  the  two  x one  plus  x  two  equals  five. Assuming  that  your  cost  function  like you  want  to  maximize  z  equals  two, maybe  five  x  one  plus  two  x  two. The  x1x2  are  your  original  variable, as  initial  solution  choice, we  will  always  choose  x1x2  to  be  zero. That's  our  choice.  But  if you  set  x  y  x  equals  zero, you  know  this  equation  does  not  hold  anymore. I  have  the  artificial  variable  coming  in. Let's  say  x  three  ad. This  X  three  head  must enter  the  cose  function  as  a  penalty  term. Because  otherwise,  you  are essentially  changing  the  solution of  the  regional  problem. You  have  the  aid  a  big  times  X  three. By  the  way,  you  can  plus  or  minor. Plus  or  minors.  You  want  to  maximize  thing, you  want  to  what  is the  penalty  when  you  do  maximization? The  penalty  is  supposed  to  make  things  bad. What  kind  of  make  the  maximization  bad? Minus,  minus  it. That  means  whenever  x  is  very  small, but  it  will  introduce  a  large  negative  term, you  are  essentially  bring down  the  cose  function  value. That's  not  intended. That's  called  the  penalty  there. This  k  plus  or  minus  is  very  important. Later  on,  when  we  talk  about the  lagrange  multiplier, if  you  have  inequality  constraint  there, the  multiplier  will  carry  signs. Positive  or  negative  choice of  the  multiplier  determined  by whether  you  maximize  the  cost  function or  minimize  cost  function because  the  multiplier  term will  become  like  a  penalty. All  right.  You  have  the  bardings  in  mind. We're  going  to  come  back  to  this  one  later. When  we  start  to  deal  with no  linear  optimization,  very  briefly. Bards  in  mind,  you  know  actually, if  you're  going  to  talk  about  the  penalty plus  or  minus,  it's  not  arbitrary. You  have  a  reason  behind  that. Now,  in  this  course, I'm  not  going  to  actually  make the  things  complicated  because  to  me, if  you  know  the  basic simplex  method  is  good  enough  already. If  you  are  really  interested, you  can  take  a  look  at  a  few  slides, you  know,  the  next  few  slides, but  I'm  not  going  to  cover  in  this  course. Because  I  find  this  one  just ad  unnecessary  complication  in  it. In  this  course,  I  will not  dealing  with  a  problem that  will  involve  artificial  variables. Okay.  So  that  means you  will  never  never encounter  a  penalty  term. Make  things  easier. But  I  want  to  just  chest your  understanding  of  the  basic  concepts. So  from  the  page  29  or  something, you  can  actually  forget  about  it. But  of  course,  some  of  you  guys  are dealing  with  tization  as  a  research  topic. A,  that  one,  you  better  look. All  right.  Anything  involving the  penalty  term  there,  you  can  skip. Well  not  be  tested  in  this  course.  Okay? So  far  so  good,  R?  Okay. So  then  next  one  is  the  duality  them. The  duality  actually  is a  very  interesting  phenomenon, dealing  with  the  LP  problem,  and  of  course, duality  also  appear  in  other  problems. Here,  what  exactly  is  a  duality  problem? You  have  one  LP  problem,  for  example, maximization,  and  you  have  a  systematic  way to  transform  this  one into  another  LP  problem. Of  course,  you're  going  to  ask  yourself, why  do  I  need  to  do  that? I  already  busy  with  one  LP  problem. Why  should  I  transform  this  one into  another  LP  problem? Because  sometimes  when you  do  this  transformation, the  number  of  variables  may  be  reduced. In  other  words,  you  could simplify  your  LP  problem  there. But  of  course,  when the  problem  is  simplified, doesn't  mean  that  your  solution  will  change. That's  the  beauty  of  the  duality. You  make  the  problem  simple, yet  you  don't  change  the  optimal  solution. On  the  optimal  solution  is the  value  of  your  variable. You  still  get  the  same  X  star  for  example. Solution  there.  Okay.  Now,  how should  I  do  this  transformation  here, for  example,  give  a  example  here  now. You  have  a  minimization  here, equal  to  C  transposed  x, subject  to  A  x, no  smaller  than  B. That's  actually typically  going  to  minimization. My  inquality  typically  is bigger  than  or  equal  to. Then  I  can  write  another  LP  problem. Equal  to  B  transpo  subject  to A  transpo  less  than  equal  to C.  If  you  compare  these  two  guys, you  realize,  I'm  going to  replace  C  transpose  by  B  transpose  here. I'm  going  to  actually  replace A  by  A  transpose. I'm  going  to  introduce a  new  variable  W  to  replace  x. If  you  do  this a  very  mechanical  transformation, you  are  essentially  transform  one  type  of  LP, in  two  is  a  dual  problem  there. This  is  actually  basically the  duality,  the  transformation  there. Of  course,  after  this  transformation, we  can  rigorously  prove  that the  two  problem  actually  has  the  best  value, the  cost  function  value. If  you  look  at  the  curve  there,  Okay. Minimization  you  go  down, maximizing  go  up,  eventually,  they  will  meet. The  custom  value  will  eventually  meet. There's  no  duality  gap. If  you  do  other  non  linear  optimization, then  When  you  do  the  transformation. Transform  maximization  to  minimization  stuff. Actually,  that's  how  the  lag long  multiply  method  works. Then  you  realize  that  they  do  have a  non  zero  duality  there. Then  another  problem  may  not give  you  exactly  the  same  solution of  your  original  problem. But  at  least  you  know  the  gap,  how  close? D  gap  is  small, that  means  solving  another  problem. You  are  very  much  get closer  to  your  shoe  problem. But  for  LP,  we  are  really good  because  the  d  gap  is  simply  zero. Okay,  that's  the  perfect  part  of  LP. That's  why  LP  is  so  widely  studied because  you  have  a  very  beautiful  propers. Now,  we  take  a  short  break, then  we  spend  a  more  time  on  the dual  and  we  see  the  benefit  of  using  that. Using  duality. This  part  could  be  tested  at  home. Yeah,  so  pay  attention  to  that,  right. We  take  a  short  break,  then we  come  back  at  the  730, Okay,  we  come  back  to  our  lecture. Now,  in  a  previous  session, we  basically  provide  the  details on  the  simplex  method and  expand  the  procedures, now  we're  going  to  start  to  talk about  some  duality  issues. Where  is  it  possible  to  simplify our  calculation  a  bit  further. So  I  gave  you  one  problem, which  is  called  the  primal  problem. That's  the  one  original  given  to  you. Then  I  have  a  systematic  way to  transform  it  into  another  problem, a  different  one,  which  is called  the  D  problem. Then  you  pay  attention  to the  rule  between  these  two  guys, the  transformation  rule  there. You  can  see  that  if the  first  guy  is  z  equals  C  transpose  x, And  then  the  C  trans  the  C  will  come  to enter  the  constrain  of  the  du  problem. Then  if  the  B originally  is  in  the  in  your  primal  problem, and  the  B  transpose  will  enter, will  be  in  your  du  problem  as the  coefficient  vector  in  the  cost  function. You  have  this  very  systematic  way of  transforming  that  one. You  can  mechanic,  mechanize it  write  a  program to  do  this  kind  transformation. So  at  the  first  side, it  doesn't  really  make  much  change,  right? I  just  basically  swap the  C  and  B's  position  there. And  have  you  swap  the  C  and  B  positions, you  just  introduce  a  new  variable, new  actor  and  also make  the  A  become  a  trap.  That's  it,  right? So  why  we  bother  to  do  that? Now,  take  a  look  at  some  examples. In  this  example,  you  can  see that  if  I  started  with  a  maximization, If  I  started  with  a  maximization, I  got  four  variables  there. But  if  I  transform this  one  into  the  dual  problem, I  will  end  up  with  three  variables. Of  course,  the  price  you  pay  is that  you're  going  to  add  one  more  constrain. So  your  constrain  number  will  increase, but  your  decision variable  potentially  reduce. What  this  is  going  to  save  you something  in  many  cases  a  year? All  right. As  long  as  the  variable  number  is  reduced, then  there's  a  hope  that your  computation  gets  simpler. Of  course,  to  certain  extent. If  you  have  too  many  constrains, and  it's  a  different  story. Okay? So  but  in  any  cases, they  provide  one  minx  that  potentially reduce  the  computational  challenge. Take  a  look  at  another  example  there. This  example  is  more  obvious  now. Assuming  that  actually your  primary  problems  here, you  got  three  variables. If  you're  going  to  transform  this  one  in  two, it's  a  d  problem  there. Now  you  realize  that  the  number of  variables  will  reduce  3-2. Then  I  can  use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  it. If  you've  got  two  variables, I  can  use  a  graphic  way. I  don't  even  need  to  use  a  symplex  method. But  the  original  problem, I  have  no  other  choice. I  must  use  a  symplex  method. The  graphic  way  is  much  quicker  to  be  solved. You  just  jom. How  do  you  do  this  one?  Just  go through  just  let's  walk  together. Then  So  the  original  problem you  try  to  minimize,  right? The  z  equals  two. You  write  like  ten  W  one plus  six  W  two  plus  eight  W  three, which  basically  equals  to  ten,  six, eight  times  W  one, W  two,  three  equals  two. You  can  write  it  in  this  man like  C  transpose. I'm  going  to  use  in  this  manner. Or  I  can  use  B  transpose make  the  symbol  consistent. Always  come  with  B. Right?  Okay.  So  then you  construing  would  be  what? You  know,  look  at  the  other  side  law. You  construing  actually  is  written  as one,  two,  and  five, three,  two,  W  one,  W  two, three,  and  it's  bigger than  basically  is  two  and  one  here. I  can  redefine.  All  right. I'm  going  to  define this  guy  like  a  A  transposed. I  call  it  re  transpose. A  transpo  bigger  than  equal  to, I'm  going  to  call  this  guy  a  CLA. Make  the  loation  consistent. Now  I  have  a minimization  Z  equal  to  B  transport subject  to  A  transpo equal  to  C.  I  know  my  ma, the  D  problem  equals  to  z, I'm  going  to  swap  the  C  and  B  now. C  transpose,  I'm  going  to replace  W  by  a  new  variable  x. And  then  you  subject  two. Now,  instead  of  A  transfer, going  to  use  A  now,  A  x, but  less  than  and  equal  to  and  B, I  have  the  B  here,  I'm  bringing this  guy  back  into  my  const. All  right.  Then  I'm  going  to  push the  C  and  the  back  into  my  cos  function. Transfer  the  A  transpose into  the  Ala.  That's  it. If  I  write  down  this  one  correctly, and  then  I  have  my  C  is  here  no,  T  one  here. So  I  have  21  here  times  x  one  and  x  two. R  Because  variable  must match  the  dimension  of  the  s,  right? And  this  guy  gave  you  what? Because  this  A  transpose is  two  by  three,  right? So  my  A  is  three  by  two. All  right.  So  you  get  112. 53,  two,  That's  give  you  A  here. The  x  basically  is  x1x2,  and  no  more  than  B, and  the  B  is  actually  is  disguy  lo, that  basically  is  ten,  68. Now  you  complete  the  transformation. In  the  exam,  if this  kind  of  a  question  coming  out, you  have  to  tell  me  what  is  the  B? What  is  the  C?  What  is  the  A  here? Then  you  clearly  write  down how  this  vectors  or matrix  changes from  one  primal  problem  to  the  d  problem. And  then  put  numbers  back  in. I  want  to  see  the  final  LP  look like  with  numbers  in  there. In  these  problems  there, then  in  this  one, clearly  you  see  that  um The  D  problem  can  reduce the  computation  complexity  because I  can  use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  it. If  you  only  got  two  variables  in  it. The  graphic  ways  way  faster  to  solve. You  can  just  draw  the  picture. You  can  quickly  identify  by using  siding  the  rulers  up  and  down, you  can  quickly  identify  the  op  solution. The  simplex  is  very  tedious, dealing  with  the  table  stamp. All  right. Of  course,  we  have  to have  a  theoretical  guarantee. Yes,  it's  beautiful.  If  I'm  going  to  use the  duality  stuff  and transform  the  big  complex  problem into  a  simple  one. But  then  what  we  can  guarantee. The  guarantee  is  that if  an  more  solution  exists, either  to  the  primal  or  symmetrically  du, du  program,  then  the  other  program also  has  an  optimal  solution. Most  importantly,  the  two  objective  functions have  the  same  optimal  value. In  other  words,  use  the  synplex, a  mess  solved  and the  right  entry  in a  row  always  had  the  same  value. Geometrically, you  can  visualize  visualize  the  solution. If  you  actually  somehow  aloud pas  solution  of  the  maximization  problem, pas  solution  of  the  minimization  problem, and  you  realize  actually these  two  guys  touch  each  other, exactly  at  the  same  optimal  value. Why  is  it  minimize  bottom  one? The  other  one  is  maximize  the  top  one. This  is  actually  you  can  visualize. It  is  a  very  beautiful  picture  there. All  right? There's  no  gap  between the  minimum  value  of  muization  problem, maximum  value  of  mamization  problem. The  d  the  gap  is  zero. Okay. So  Yeah,  they  actually  mentioned  that. If  is  a  simplex  method, the  mot  solution  will be  fined  as  the  last  role, the  rightmost  entry  there.  Yeah. All  right.  There's  also something  even  interesting. You  actually  talk  about  the  so  called, a  you  do  the  transformation, you  can  still  use  the  simplex  method. That's  why  the  table  still  come  in. So  the  transformation  itself has  nothing  to  do  with  the  simplex  method. All  right,  you  do  the  transformation, then  you  can  use any  other  method  to  solve  it. In  case  you  can actually  use  a  synchroc  method, you  follow  exact  the  procedure we  mentioned  in  the  first  session  there. Construct  the  ital  table  and then  apply  the  animatic  role  operations. Everybody  should  be  aware  of  what the  C  zero  and  C  means, when  you  do  the  maximization, this  C  zero,  the  thing  is  always  zero. Don't  need  to  worry  about  that. When  you  do  the  maximization, when  your  constraint  is always  less  than  equal  to. Actually,  if  your  constraint is  always  less  than  equal  to  stuff, you  will  never  never  encounter  the  zero. As  long  as  artificial  variable coming  in,  no  penalty. Yeah.  Since  this  course, we  will  never  deal  with  artificial  variables. Therefore,  you  can  be  sure  that  this  term will  always  be  zero initially  in  your  initial  table. Okay?  So  far  so  good. Then,  there's  a  very, very  interesting  phenomenon. We  can  observe  when you  apply  this  duality  transformation  stem. It's  called  a  complimentary  stagns  property. What  does  that  mean? All  right?  Now,  let's  consider. I  give  you  two  problems. One  is  a  primal. The  other  one  is  a  dual  here. The  primal  problem  is  a  minimization  problem. Mimize  do.  The  other  one  is  opposite. If  you  min,  this  one  the  has one  max  and  so  on,  so  forth. When  you  do  the  minimization, and  your  constraint  is  always written  as  bigger  than  equal  two. That  basically  means  that  you're  going  to introduce  a  suplus  variable. Assuming  that  your  spl  variable  EI, this  EI  is  a  suplus  variable  there. That  means  that  you're  going  to  introduce those  variables  into this  primal  problem  to  make this  constraint  become  equality. All  right. Of  course,  I  mean,  when  this  happens, you  may  have  to  choose the  u  the  so  called  artificial  variable. But  we're  not  really worried  too  much  about  that  one. We  will  only  consider the  suplus  variables  because if  the  algorithm  converge,  it  will  converge. All  these  artificial  variables  value will  become  zero,  will  disappear. That  means  we  don't  need  to  bother  to consider  the  last  results. The  last  result,  we  only  care about  is  a  supl  variable  value. Similarly,  for  the  dual  problem and  because  it's  maximization, we're  going  to  introduce  the  snack  variables, use  S  represent  snack  variables. For  every  inequality  in  your  dual  problems, you're  going  to  introduce one  S  snack  variables. Again,  we  are  not  considered the  artificial  variable. Because  if  you  do have  an  equality  constraint, I  do  need  to  introduce the  artificial  variable  there. But  you  can  guarantee  that once  these  gums  converge, The  artificial  variables, if  they  have  a  solution  there, tvariable  value  must  be zero,  disappear,  for  sure. So  we  don't  need  to  worry  too  much. Now  with  this  kind  of  presetting  there. For  minimization,  I'm  going  to  introduce a  Surplus  variable  due  to this  special  form  of  A  equality. For  the  maximization,  I'm going  to  introduce  a  snack  variable. Then  once  the  calculation  is  converge, we  have  a  very  beautiful  results. The  multiplication  of  the  Surplus  variable, with  the  decision  variable in  your  dual  problem. The  suplus  variable  in  your  primal  problem, multiply  the  so  called the  decision  variable  in your  dual  problem  actually  equals  zero. They  actually  match  mapping that  bef  because  a  number  of spl  variable  equal  to  the  dimension  of  the  B. But  the  number  of  the  variable  W is  also  matching  the  size  of  the  B  there. These  two  guys  actually  indeed  match. Indeed  the  match  here. Similarly,  the  multiplication of  each  snack  variable  in  your  du  problem, is  the  decision  variable  in your  primal  problem  is  also  equal  zero. Okay?  The  proof  actually I  think  using  the  syplex  table  to  argue. This  is  actually  very beautiful  results  there. Later  on,  when  we  talk  about the  KKT  constrain. A  cruise  tucker  constrain when  we're  dealing  with  a  lo  d  pization, we're  going  to  see  a  similar  property, the  lug  multiplier  times  decision  variable always  equals  zero, or  times  the  constrain  al  equals  zero. That's  have  a  similar  similar  nature  in  it. This  one,  actually,  of  course, for  LP  problem, you  don't  really  need  this  guy. You  know  this  is  a  fact.  It's  a  fact. For  LP,  they  must  hold, and  you  can  help  to  check  your  solution. If  you  do  actually  have a  primal  problem,  you  have  solve  it. You  have  a  dual  problem,  you  solve  it, then  you  can  check  these  two properties,  step  will  hold. Of  course,  nobody  will  do  that. Because  I  already  solve  it  why  border, I  solve  this  dual  problem. That's  why  I'm  saying  that  for  the  LP, the  so  called  beautiful complimentary  snacks  property is  only  have  a  theoretical  meaning. But  does  not  really  help  you  to compute  because  you  don't need  to  border  to  do  that. However,  it's  a  very  similar probably  in  the  Lung  oi,  the  KKT  condition. That  is  critical  for solving  the  lung  it  timization  problem. That's  one  we  will  we  mention  briefly  also, maybe  next  week,  the  week  on  the  next. Here,  just  to  bear  in  mind  when  I  say complimentary  snack  is probably,  you  know  what  I'm  talking  about. The  snack  variables  in  your  primary  problem, or  the  surplus  vari  in  your  primary  problem, and  the  dual  problem variable,  they  are  related. Similarly, the  snack  variable  of  the  deal  problem and  primary  problems  variable. They  are  also  related. This  is  actually  quite  interesting. For  now,  you  can actually  just  just  memorize  it. We  can  just  use  example. We  can  consider  some  example here,  give  you  example  here. I'm  going  to  actually  maximize  this  guy. This  is  a  primal  problem. I'm  going  to  transform  this  one into  its  due  problem. It's  a  minimization  here  now. You  can  see  that  the  48, 20  and  80  original appearing  in  a  train  in  your  primal  problem. Will  enter  into  your  cost  function  in your  dual  problem,  48  to  28. Similarly,  previously, the  coefficient  vector  in your  primary  problem  will come  into  as  part  of  the  constrain. After  you  do  this  transformation  here, you  solve  two  problem  one by  one  by  using  synplex  method. It  will  take  some  time,  of  course. Then  the  first  problem  because  maximization you're  going  to  have  a  snack  variable. You  have  this  solution  here. You  can  verify  its  true by  using  synchros  method. Then  you  can  also  solve  this  dual  problem, and  then  you  have  another  solution  there. Now  you  try  to  verify what  this  probably  hold. The  first  solution  for the  primal  problem  there, you  have  three  original  variable, and  you  have  three  snack  variables  there. S  one  value  is  24, S  two  is  zero,  S  three  is  zero. And  similarly,  of  course, x  y  is  two,  x  is  zero,  and  is  eight. Now,  similarly  for  the  du  problem, we're  going  to  introduce  a  surprise  variable because  the  dual  problem is  a  minimization  problem. You  have  a  e  1e2e3. If  you  take  a  look  at  the  solution  here, you  know  that  e  one  equals  zero, equal  five,  e  equals  zero  here. Now  I'm  going  to  check. S  one  times  W  one, the  one  value  is  zero. S  one  value  is  24, zero  times  24  give  you  zero. Now,  the  s2s2  is  this  guy, zero,  zero  times  W  two, zero  times  ten  is  zero, S  is  zero,  S  three  times w30  times  ten  is  also  zero. The  first  one  is  confirmed Then  you  do  the  other  way  around. You  can  see  E  one  times  x  one, zero  times  two  is  zero, five  times  zero  is  zero, zero  times  eight  is  also  zero. You  do  actually  see  that  y, the  complimentary  stack  is probably  holds  beautifully. You  see  that  look like  there's  a  pattern  there. Indeed,  it's  a  pattern  there. That's  stack  variables. Um,  in  one  problem  is indeed  corresponding  has a  relation  with  your  solution, another  problem,  the  primal  problem. They  are  indeed  coupled. But  we  are  not  really  worried  about the  deep  theoretical  reasoning  here  now. But  the  interest  state  can certainly  dig  into  it.  Okay. That's  the  duality  things. And  for  this  one,  I  want  to  repeat  that, it  will  potentially  bring  benefit  to you  because  it  could  reduce  pal  variables. Okay. Um  You  can  think about  under  what  conditions that  they  might  not  help  you  much. You  know  why  you  use  a  simplex  method, the  complex  is  not  only determined  number  variables, but  also  determined  by  the  number  of  row. The  row  is  determined  by the  number  of  construing. If  you  have  a  lot  of  construing, but  a  few  number  variables. Then  what  method? For  example,  your  primary  problem has  a  lot  of  constrains. Only  a  few  number  of  variables. Is  it  worthy  to  use  du  problem? For  example,  you  have  three  variables, but  you  have  a  100  constrain. In  a  du  problem,  how  many  variable  you  have? If  your  primary  problem  has  three  variable, 100  consts, your  dual  problem  has  how many  variables,  how  many  constrain. Your  dual  problem  has  100  variables, how  many  consts?  The  consts. Your  table  only  has  three  rows. Another  one  has  100  rows. You  can  imagine  which  one is  more  convenient  to  compute? The  three  row  much  faster. At  least  writing  is  c, but  Does  that  necessarily mean  that  it  much  simpler. You  might  still  need  to  iterate  a lot  because  at  least  you  have 100  entries  at  the  last  row. You  might  still  go  through quite  a  few  iteration. But  the  good  news  that  iteration will  be  much  faster. You  think  about  it.  I  mean, this  is  what  come  to the  complexity  issues  there. But  at  least  you  have some  a  personal  sense  under what  circumstances  I  should consider  using  or  I  do  problem. If  you  have  find  that,  you have  very  few  number  of  cons. For  example,  only  two  cons. I  will  definitely  use  a  dual  problem. Why?  Because  I'm  going  to  transform it  into  a  dual  problem only  has  a  two  variable. I  will  use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  it. A  graphic  way,  no  matter  how  many constrain,  not  just  one  line. You  can  quickly  do  it. If  you  have  only  two no  more  than  two  constraining, you  think  about  using  d. Strongly  recommended  Ba definitely  will  save  you  time. All  right. Okay,  so  that's  some  guideline  there. Okay.  So  now  we  are  moving  to  the  next  topic, k,  the  so  called  the  sensitivity  analysis. The  sensitive  analysis actually  is  very  important. I  guess,  in  many  engineering  disciplines, we  do  need  a  sensitive  analysis  to understand  how  the  solutions respond  to the  uncertainties  of  your  problems. Okay.  Now,  in  the  LP, you  have  coefficients  of  the  cost  function, that  could  potentially  change. For  example,  I  have  one  solution  to solve  one  type  of  problem, to  decide  how  many work  pieces  I  need  to  produce. But  then  I  have  another  problem  to  solve, you  know,  you  know, how  many,  you  know, the  shoes  or  apples  I  should  grade. I  realize  these  two  problems  very  much similar  except  for a  few  parameters  value  different. Now  you  can  ask  yourself, do  I  really  need  to recompute  to compute  solve  the  second  problem? If  your  santific  analysis  tell  you  that the  coefficient  change  is still  within  a  short  range, then  I  don't  even  need  to  both  the  compute. I  know  that  my  first  problem  solution is  the  bum  one  for  my  second  one. Except  for the  corres  function  value  will  different. But  the  Actually  I have  a  systematic  way  to  do  that. I  will  directly  adapt my  first  optimal  solution into  opal  solution  for  the  second  one. I  don't  need  to  recompute  everything  there. That's  actually  the  one  potential benefit  of  the  sent  analysis. I  tell  you  that  when  you  can  reuse, you  can  reuse  your  optimal  solutions. From  one  problem  in  another  problem  there. First  of  all,  we  need  to understand  where  the  scenify  come  from. You  take  a  look  at  the  LP  problem  here.  Okay? In  this  problem,  there's several  constant  settings  there. The  ABC, basically,  they  are  the  coefficients  coming from  maybe  the  real set  real  applications  there,  right? If  due  to  some  reason and  either  one  of  them  or  all  of  them, start  to  make  certain  change. The  value  deviated  from the  original  intentive  value. Then  you  can  ask  yourself, within  what  range  of  the  change. I  can  still  safely  say  that  which those  optimal  variables  we  decide  in the  previous  original  problem is  still  maintained  optimal. The  value  could  be  changed. But  I  still  know  that,  for example,  in  the  first  problem, I  know  x1x2  is  my  optimal  variable. They  become  the  basic  variable in  your  last  iteration. That  means  that  their  value is  the  optimal  value  there. But  if  I  can  prove  that  within certain  change  of  the  coefficients, the  x1x2  still  maintain as  the  basic  variables. I  know  that  these  two  guys, the  value  will  still leading  to  the  optimal  solution  there. But  under  what  conditions, the  last  basic  variable  set  will  not  change. This  is  actually  the  basic  sensitives will  try  to  answer. Now  we  have  this  beautiful  table  there. The  for  maximization. In  this  case  is,  you  can  see that  take  a  look at  how  this  one  really  works. Originally,  you  have  A  no  more  than  B. Try  to  recall. The  original  maximization  problem  is  z equals  to  C  transpose  x and  subject  to  you  maximize. Subject  to  e  x  number  than  B. Now  I'm  going  to  actually  start  to create  the  snack  variable  coming  in  now. Basically,  you  know  that  I'm going  to  actually  create  what? I'm  going  to  just  use some  identity  matrix  because the  snack  variable  essentially  create every  snack  variable initially  will  be  considered as  a  as  a  so  called  a  basic  variable. Remember  that,  right? Okay.  You  are  in  charge  of  identity, this  one,  then  you are  essentially  create  augmented  now. I'm  going  to  augment  A  and  x  n  and  x and  I  will  use the  so  called  S  or  I  can  use  x. These  are  the  snack  variable  here. The  outcome  is  still  BL,  still  B  here. That's  why  I'm  going  to  write that's  how  the  first  one  come into  picture,  the  first  row  here  now. I'm  going  to  explicitly incorporate  snack  variables  coming  in. Take  a  look  at  this  one.  These  are the  variables  are  all  the  snack  variables. For  example,  you  have  X  one, two,  X  one  plus  X  two  and  no  more  than  five. And  you  have  x  one  plus three  x  two  and  no  more  than  six. I  know  that  in  this  cases, my  A  equals  to  213. I'm  right,  and  my  B basically  equals  to  five  and  six. Now  I'm  going  to  start  to  add the  snack  variable  in two  into  inequalities  there. Then  I  have  two  x  one  plus x  two  plus  x  three  equals  to  five, and  then  x  one  plus  three  x two  plus  x  four  equals  to  six. Okay.  Now,  what  I'm going  to  rewrite  this  one  here, I  know  that  this  one  actually basically  equals  to  two, one,  one,  three,  and  then  1001. Because  now  your  variable  will  become  x  one, x  two,  x  three,  and  x  four. But  the  outcome  still  below  five  and  six. You  can  see  this  is  A  here,  and  this  is  M. Coming  into  picture. That's  why  how  you  create  that  table. Now  with  this  understanding, and  the  rest  is  all  testing your  understanding  of  the  ding  algebra. Okay.  Once  I  have this  equation  here,  and  of  course, I  have  to  deal  with  the  last  row, but  the  last  row  is  nothing because  my  cose  function, I  got  nothing  to  do  with  my  snack  variable. Therefore,  I  will  have  a negative  c  is  due  to  the  x. Zero  is  coefficients  in your  css  function  corresponding to  my  snack  variable. It's  zero  because  there's no  snack  variable  in  my  cose  function. Then  the  outcome  y  is zero  here  because  of  a  y  zero, I  recall  that  and  I  explain  this  one  earlier. I  still  find  a  page  there.  Here  you  go. Try  to  recall  this  guy  here. Think  about  this  one.  This  one  here. That's  how  this  guy  come  into  picture. Now,  because  I  don't  have anything  about  the  snack variable  in  my  cost  function. Therefore,  the  augmented  the  matrix augmented  vector  in  your  css  function  part, this  point  is  zero,  and the  edition  y  is  zero,  y  is  zero. Because  when  I  move the  C  transpos  x  to  the  left  hand  side, then  the  zero  coming out  from  the  right  hand  side of  your  equation  I  say. This  is  the  zero  coming  from  here. That's  the  zero  talking  about. I  will  transform  the  cost function  into  a  equation. By  introducing a  new  variable  z  there,  which  I  don't  care. That's  why  we  come  into  this  picture. This  is  my  initial  table. Then  of  course,  you  can  actually  start to  do  the  synplex  method. Do  the  elementary  row  operation on  this  matrix, actually  on  this  augmented  matrix. You  can  think  about  this  whole  block as  a  coefficient  matrix. This  column  is  a  constant  one. When  you  solve  ina  equations, you  know  I'm  talking  about,  augmented  matrix. You  have  this  coefficient matrix  constant  column. Then  you  carry  out  all these  elementary  row  operation until  the  Synplex  method. Stops  or  converge. If  it  converge,  what  happened? If  this  one  converge, what  do  what  happened  there? If  you  converge,  then  you  take  a  look  at the  part  corresponding to  the  snack  variables. You  realize  that  on  the  snack  variable, you  have  another  new  matrix  now, coming  out  of  the  elementary  rule  operation. So  I'm  going  to  try  to  use  example  here  now. For  example,  previously. Use  the  previous  example. Yeah,  here  you  go.  You  can see  that  this  one  stops. By  stops? Because  at  the  bottom, every  guy  is  non  negative  now. Once  it  stops,  then  take  a  look  at the  coefficient  matrix under  the  stack  variables. You  can  see  I  got another  three  by  three  here  now, 100.5,  010.5,  000.5. This  is  the  matrix  we're  talking  about. That's  the  S  matrix. Whenever  the  simplest  methods  terminate, you  will  see  this  matrix,  this  S  matrix. Then  you  come  back  to your  original  starting  matrix  here. You  start  from  here. But  then  you  end  at  this  matrix. Why  take  a  look  at  this  column  here, this  row  here,  what  exactly  happened? What  exactly  happened From  your  original  table. This  is  the  first  row  here, and  then  turn  it  into  this  guy. Turn  into  this  guy  here. Now,  tell  me  what  is  the  S  matrix  really  is? What  is  the  S  matrix? But  you  guys  learned  the  lit  algebra. You  know  that  sh  say, what  we  should  call  about  S  matrix. The  S  matrix  actually record  all  the  elementary operations  you  carried  out. It's  a  collection  of the  elementary  operations  over your  identity  matrix  or  algebra  speaking, it  is  a  multiplication  of all  the  elementary  matrices when  you  do  the  transformation. After  all  this  trouble, all  this  elementary  operation  effect is  condensed  into  a  single  matrix  S. You  are  essentially  apply elementary  row  operation  over A  over  identity  matrix  I  over  B. Then  you  transform  the  first  synplex  table into  the  final  synflex  table. But  what  happened  to  my  cost  function  value? This  is  the  last  one  here  now. Because  when  I  do the  elementary  row  operation, I  will  also  do  the  same  thing to  my  last  role. My  last  role  goes goes  through  elementary  row  operation  there. What  happened  to  that  guy? Basically,  what  happened  to  last  role  here. You  can  see.  This  is my  original  last  role  here. How  this  last  row actually  turned  into  this  one? Turn  into  this  one  here. What  exactly  happened? This  is  all  about  the  needed  algebra. If  I  give  you  bunch of  equation  right  in  this  manner. When  I  apply  the  element row  operation  on  the  first  row, that  means  I  multiply S  on  every  term  in  your  first  row. I  end  up  with  my  final  termination  form. But  at  the  same  time,  I'm  also apply  element  row  operation to  the  last  row  as  well. Because  I  need  to  make  the  last  row, every  entry  become  a  non  negative. This  guy  will  also  receive the  elementary  rule  operation applied  to  the  top one  and  eight  to  your  last  one. Try  to  recall.  When  you do  the  elementary  operation  to  your  last  row, there's  only  one  elementary rule  operation  applied. Multiply  one  row,  add  to  another  row. You  always  do  this  type  of  eletic  operation. You  you  multiply  one  row  rows into  this  first  part, and  you  add  to  the  last  column. That's  what  we're  doing  there. All  this  impact,  all  this  elet  role  operation eventually  will  be absorbed  on  the  last  row  is actually  absorbed  by  this  y  here. This  y  actually  is  a  collection of  all  this  eimtic  role  operation apply  to  the  last  row. But  think  about  how  this  one  really  worked. If  I  ask  you  to  try  to refresh  your  memory  about  the  linear  algebra. Think  about  what  happened. The  simplex  method  is  nothing  really  magic. It's  all  on  solving  the  linear  equations. If  you  understand  this  one, everything  looks  so  straightforward. You  have  the  A  and  I, Times  x,  of  course, you  can  say  x  and  x  S  low  and  going  to  be. That's  the  constrain  there. You  also  have  the  one  last  row. Negative  c  transpose  and  zero, Bf  now,  I  put  a  00  corresponding  to  this  guy. C  correspond  to  this  one. That's  a  correspondence  there. Zero  is  all  the  entry under  the  snack  variables. Now  you  have  a  zero  here. Now,  but  later  on, this  one  become  y  transpose  now. What  happened?  What  could  happen? How  do  you  actually  come  from the  i  into  a  Y  transpose? What  can  you  do? If  I  multiply  y  transpose  to  this  row  here, and  eight  to  the  last  row,  what  will  happen? You  essentially  y  transpose  times  i. Let's  give  you  y  transpose. A  to  this  guy.  The  outcome  is  this  one  now. Similarly,  y  transpose  apply to  A,  A  to  this  guy. You  have  a  y  transpose  A  then. You  come  into  the  last  row. Similarly,  the  y  transpose  times  B, now  you  come  into  this  guy. That's  nothing  special. It's  just  the  sm  equations. But  you  have  to  think  about  using eleic  rule  operation. That's  why,  eventually,  you  come up  with  the  final  termination  table  there. This  one  suggests  where you  should  look  for  the  S, where  you  should  look  for  the  y. The  rest  is  all  the  fixed  already  ABC. Now,  if  I  start  to  change  the  value, some  entries  of  A, some  entry  of  the  B,  some  g  of  the  C, And  what  could  happen  to  the  final  table? Assuming  that,  y  your  S  is  not  changed. You  are  carried  out precisely  the  same  procedure. The  same  elementary  operation. That  means  that  basically S  and  Y  will  not  change. Then  if  I  change  the  value  inside  ABC, then  what  is  this  table  look  like? That  one  will  directly  affect whether  or  not  basic  variables, x  p  will  still  be  basic  after  disturbance. This  is  my  problem  set  up  now. I  tell  you  I  already solve  my  original  problem, and  I  got  my  S  matrix, I  got  my  y  matrix. Now  I'm  going  to  ask  you  if  I somehow  start  to  change some  values  in  the  ABC, and  I  want  to  ask myself,  under  what  conditions, what  kind  of  value  change will  guarantee  that  my  x  B is  the  same  basic variables  in  your  new  problem. In  other  words,  my  optimal  solution, I  say  optimal  basic  variable  choice is  invariant  under the  influence  of  the  disturbance, robust  to  the  disturbance. That's  all  about  the  sensitivity analysis  try  to  answer. But  two  answer  this  question, the  first  one  you  need  to  know,  when you  do  the  syplex  operations, what,  what  properties  must  be  kept. I  know  that  the  B  must  be  all  non  negative. The  B  value,  the  B  vector must  be  all  nuc  negative. The  last  row  of your  table  must  be  all  nu  negative  as  well. Those  are  the  necessary  condition. You  must  maintain,  otherwise, simplest  method  will  not terminate,  it  will  continue. All  these  rules  I  introduced previously  choosing  the  small  ratio, choosing  the  most  negative  entry in  the  last  row,  whatever. I  will  boil  down  to  the  constraint  and  say that  in  every  step, when  the  simplest  method  terminate, the  B  matrix  column, the  B  column,  the  constant  column must  be  all  non  negative. You  cannot  find  any  value  become  negative. The  last  row  must  be  all  non  negative. Except  for  the  last  entry. The  last  entry  in  the  last  row,  I  don't  know. I  mean,  it's  cose  function.  I  don't  care, but  all  other  coefficient entry  must  be  non  negative. That's  the  necessary  condition to  guarantee  that  the  synclx  method  works. I  need  to  use  these  necessary  conditions. When  I  reason,  if ABC  start  to  have  some  entry  changes, can  I  still  make  sure  that  x  B is  still  the  basic  variables in  the  new  problem. This  actually  is  the  target of  my  sensitive  analysis. Now  we  have  a  separate  condition. I  can  either  change  it  B  only. Or  I'm  going  to  change  C  matrix.  C  vector. Or  I  will  change  the  A  matrix. I'm  going  to  analyze  them  one  by  one. Then  you  will  see  that  how  do  you derive  the  sufficient  condition? To  guarantee  that  my  x  B  will  still maintain  the  optimal  basic  variables. Even  some  values  in  the  ABC  matrix  changes. This  one,  Based  on  this  setting  hole, there's  a  systematic  way  to  tell you  how  do  you  adapt one  opal  solution  from  one  problem  to another  problem  without  going through  the  symplex  method. You  don't  need  to  go through  the  symplex  method anymore.  No  point. Because  you  can  guarantee  that  the  same  S, the  same  y  will  still  be  maintained. We'll  take  a  short  break  and then  we  will  finish  this  sy  analysis  part. The  syn  analysis  to  understand. Personally, I  think  this  is  the  most  conducing  part. It  does  actually  require you  to  understand  the  need algebra.  Not  many  actually. It's  about  just  the  solvability  of the  neta  equations  using animatic  rule  operation, but  you  need  to  know  the  matrix  operation. But  to  me,  I  think  this  is the  only  confusing  part  throughout this  The  first  part  of  this  course. The  rest  is  very  straightforward. I'm  talking  about  the  duality  stuff, the  syplex  method  graph method,  I  is  very  mechanical. I  just  follow  the  procedure. You're  going  to  get  results. But  the  sent  analysis, you  need  to  know  where  to  change, what  matrix  you  are  looking  for. Then  what  inequality  you have  to  set  up  in  order  to  find the  necessary  sub  condition  to guarantee  the  robustness  of  this  problem. This  is  actually  something a  little  bit  involved. We'll  take  a  short  break, then  we'll  come  back. So  I  want  to  remind the  first  quiz  will  take  place  in  week. In  the  last  hour  of  the. Well  be  just  half  an  hour  30  minute quiz,  very  simple  one. But  we  can  just  just  use  the  TU  learn. I'm  going  to  create  a  portal. So  it  will  be  opened  maybe 5  minutes  before  the  quiz  start. Everybody  can  log  into  the  portal, and  30  minutes, if  you  cannot  finish,  it  will  be  kicked  out. Okay,  that's  very  much a  simple,  very  smooth  process. But  you  have  to  bring  your  own  laptop, right.  Only  30  minutes. You  know,  not  many  questions  I  can  ask. Don't  worry  too  much.  Okay.  Week  for. Yeah,  this  location.  All  right. I'm  sorry.  IPA  is also  fine  as  long  as  you can  access  NTU  learn. Everything  is  done  inside  the  NTU  learn. I  may  need  you  to  no,  what  I  do  is  actually, I  will  pose  the  problem in  PDF  file  in  NTU  learn. When  you  get  into  it,  you  see  it, then  you  write  down  your  answer, you  take  a  photo,  you upload  back  to  NTU  learn. I  will  give  you  another  ten  to  15  minutes to  upload  ion. Okay?  So  you  have  a  30  minutes  finish, and  then  you  have another  ten  to  15  minutes to  upload  your  solution  there. Okay.  So  that's  roughly  about  1  hour to  get  thing  download. Okay.  So  you  roughly  know the  procedure.  All  right. Okay,  so  now  we  come  back  to the  last  hour  of  this  lecture. So  at  the  end  of  the  previous  hour, we  already  start  to  introduce a  so  called  sensitivity  analysis, and  we  need  to know  what's  the  purpose  of  doing analysis  and  what  is the  goal  of  doing  this  one.  All  right. So  basically,  we  want  to  answer  one  question. In  case  that  the  original  problem settled  with  x  B  as  the  last  basic  variables, when  the  synplex  method  converge. Then  under  what  conditions, even  when  the  entry  value  inside  the  ABC, also  changed,  but  the  x  B  will still  be  maintained  as the  last  optimal  basic  values, basic  variables. Okay  that's  actually  the  question  we  want  to answer.  Now,  let's  see. I'm  going  to  start  to  talk  about the  different  possibility  of  disturbance. Okay?  Because  you  have  the  ABC  there,  right. So  therefore,  ideally,  you  know, A  one  of  them  can  change. The  simple,  some  B  entry  changes, or  the  C  entry  changes. The  most  complicated  one  is the  A  entry  changes.  Let's  see. That's  depends  on  the  different  scenario. The  treatment  will  be  different. However,  the  target  is  very  clear. Because  when  I  do  this  operation, I  need  to  make  sure  that  all  the  B  column. Has  to  be  maintained  as  long  negative. The  last  row  must  be  all  non  negative. And  if  it's  possible, I  need  to  maintain my  previous  basic  variables, still  be  the  basic  variables. Or  essentially,  we  can  say  that  I  want my  S  matrix  and  y  matrix  to  the  same. That's  actually  the  intention there.  Now  let's  see. Is  it  possible  or  not?  If  I  start  to perturb  some  entry  values or  in  one  parameters. Okay?  Let's  just  I think  use  one  example,  right? You  have  one  model  here. This  is  my  original  problem. I  solve  it  probably. Okay.  And  is  everything  perfectly  well? You  know,  I  got  the  opio  solution. All  right?  This  is  actually  basically, just  your  simplex  message so  you  create  a  first  table. And  then  you  know  that  in  this  table, your  A,  okay,  what  is  the  A  here? A  is  actually  basically columns  under  your  original  variable  x1x2, because  xx4x5,  they  are  the  snack  variables. Okay.  So  initially  under  the  snack  variable, the  matrix  is  identity  matrix. And  then  the  collection  of  the  two  columns under  the  original  variables d  of  the  matrix  A. The  C  is  a  basic  collection of  the  coefficient  in  course  function, and  the  B  is  the  guy, 41218,  that  might  be. The  zero,  you  know actually  what  the  zero  come  from. I  spent  so  much  time explaining  what  the  last  entry, y  is  zero,  initially. Now  I  got  everything. That's  my  initial  setting  there. Now  I'm  going  to  carry  out the  elementary  rule  operation,  whatever. In  the  end,  the  simplex  method  converge. They  converge  into  this  table. Okay.  Now  you  observe this  table  and  you  realize  that  the matrix  under  the  snack  variables,  xx4x5, corresponding  to  the  matrix  S, and  also  the  last  row, the  entries  in  the  last  row corresponding  to  the  snack  variables, corresponding  to  the  vector  y  transpose. All  right.  I  got  this  one  as  well. Now  I'm  going  to start  those  are  already  setting  now. Based  on  the  original  problem, I  have  all  such  informations. Now  I'm  going  to  start  to  perturb. But  be  careful  now,  because I'm  assuming  that  after  per  tb, my  elementary  rule  operation  impact  will still  be  absorbed  into  the  matrix  S  and  y. These  two  guys  still  the  same. Then  we  will  see  that  how this  affect  the  solution. Actually,  when  we  do  the  perturb, When  you  solve  the  problem, In  your  real  application,  assuming  that the  coefficient  in  your  problem actually  coming  from  the  real  system  there. For  example, from  the  physical  constraints,  so  on. If  the  system  under  the  influence of  the  unknown  external  factor, you  don't  really  know the  parameter  actual  changes. Just  like  in  the  real  system, how  do  you  analyze the  robustn  of  the  system  there? If  the  sum  parameters start  to  change,  which  you  don't  really  know. But  then  you  can  guarantee that  within  a  certain  range, the  optimal  solution  is  still  maintained. Here  we'll  do  the,  the  same  trick. Assuming  that  you  still  apply the  same  S  matrix and  apply  the  same  y  vector. Then  what  kind  of  disturbance to  the  ABC  matrix, will  you  ensure  that  the  final  x  p, the  basic  variables  will  not  change. That's  what  we  want  to  answer. Here,  the  first  change  is  a  B. Okay. Now,  assuming  that  one of  the  guy  is  perturbed. Okay,  12  now  is  changed  to  12  plus  data. I  don't  know  the  data  value. I  want  to  determine  what  the  maximum data  value  can  ensure that  my  previously  determined the  basic  variable  is  still  basic. What  the  previous  basic  variable, by  the  way  for  this  one? If  you  take  a  look  at  this  one,  tell me  what's  the  basic  variable? Here.  X1x2.  These  two  guys  both  are  basic. I  can  read  the  value,  of  course, X  two  values  six  x  one  value  is  tool. These  are  the  optimal  value in  my  original  problem. It  could  slightly  change  later. But  at  least  I  want  to  make  sure x1x2  is  still  basic  valuable. Now,  let's  come  back  to  the  first  b. Change  the  12  B  vector  in  to  12  plus  data. My  job  is  to  determine  what  kind  of data  value  will  make  my  x1x2  still  basic. No  change.  Right? Okay,  so  I'm  going  to  bring  the  things into  this  beautiful  table,  right? This  is  just  very  mechanical  now. You  have  a  change. Signal  change.  But  my  B  change. B  change  from  a  B  to  B  C,  right? B  sub  C  here. So  I  this  case  is, and  you  already  identified  S, you  multiply  S  to  the  BC. What's  the  BC?  Previously  I  mentioned, the  middle  12  value  become  12  plus  data. You  apply  this  e  matrix  and  multiply  this  c, and  then  you  end  up  with  this  new  matrix  now. You're  going  to  this  one  will  be  placed  here. Place  to  the  last  column  of  your  new  table. Similarly, you  can  also  calculate  the  last  one. But  this  one  I  don't really  care  because  this  one  is basically  is  your  new  optimal  value. I'm  not  talking  about  this  optimal  value  yet. I  want  to  make  sure  that  what  kind  of  data? Make  sure  that  the  XP  is  still  basic. When  you  end  up,  when you  finish  the  iteration, the  XP  is  still  basic. How  do  I  ensure that  in  this  table,  XP  is  still  basic. You  can  see  as  long  as  this  S  is  unchanged. Be  careful  now,  because in  the  previous  table. In  the  previous  table, with  this  S  setting  there, and  I  know  that  my  basic  variable is  actually  x1xx  three. Actually  x1x3  basic  variable  here  now. Now  if  I  maintain  the  same  S  matrix  here, It  is  obvious  that  I'm  still  have  x1x  to  x  S, my  basic  variable,  no  change  at  all. This  is  actually  very  obvious. In  this  problem  here, as  long  as  my  S  is  maintained  here, no  change,  I  can guarantee  this  guy  is  still  no  change. But  I  need  to  make  sure  that this  column  A  times  B  c  subs  C, everything  has  to  be  non  negative. Because  otherwise,  the  symplex  method will  fail,  right?  Okay? The  necessary  condition  for symplex  method  works  is that  this  last  column, every  value  has  to  be  nonnative, make  sure  non  negative  lack. Also  the  last  one,  this  part still  maintain  as  non  negative. But  this  one  is  obvious because  nothing  changed  yet. Compare  with  the  previous  table, this  last  part,  nothing  is  changed. Therefore,  still  everything  is non  negative,  and  perfectly  fine. The  only  thing  that  concerned  me  is this  guy  times  B  subced. Because  now  you've  got  the  data  coming  in. You  have  to  choose  the  data  in such  way  that  every  entry in  this  block  has  to  be  non  negative. As  des  conditions  satisfied, I  know  that  Synplex  method successfully  terminate. In  this  cases,  I  got  the  three  equality. Everybody  has  to  be  non  negative. I  can  calculate. In  the  end,  I  know  the  data  must  be within  negative  six  and  past  six. As  long  data  within  this  range, I  can  guarantee  that  with  the  same  matrix, with  the  same  y  matrix, the  Synplex  method  will  terminate. And  when  they  terminate the  x  previous  XP  set is  still  the  basic  variables. Now,  after  this  one  is  guaranteed, once  the  data  is  chosen  within  the  range, what  is  the  true  optimal  value? Cisco.  I  will  directly use  previous  derived  the  Y  transpose, multiply  the  B  perturbed  BC. I  will  end  up  with  a  new  optimal  value. I  can  directly  read from  my  previous  solution, I  can  immediately  write  down the  optimal  solution  for the  new  problem  after  perturbation. Okay. This  is  actually  the  one  usefulness of  carried out  the  so  called  senti  analysis  law because  yes, you  change  the  B,  but  I can  tell  you  what  is  the final  result  look  like? It's  this  guy. And  also  the  optimal basic  variable  still  the  same. That's  the  answer  to the  one  type  of  disturbance. Now,  what  happened  if  I'm going  to  make  things  more  complex? Now,  this  is  another  model. Then  I  can  identify  the  S  matrix, the  y  matrix,  or  y  vector. That's  the  same  thing,  You carried  out  the  symplex  method. When  every  when  settle  down, when  everything  is  converge, Now  you  know  that  this  x  x  f  x  five is  still  I  think  x45  is  a  snack  variable, it's  a  snack  variable  there. Therefore,  I  can  immediately  write  down my  S  matrix  is  actually  disguy. One,  zero,  zero,  zero, one  negative  one,  001  half. This  is  my  S  matrix, and  my  y,  the  vector  is  005o2.  I  read  it. Then  from  here,  I  know that  my  basic  variable  is  X  two, X,  and  x  four. I  want  to  maintain  it  or hope  I  can  maintain  it, even  under  the  disturbance  or perturbation  over  certain  problem  parameters. This  is  my  original  solution, and  then  I'm  going  to  start  to  change. Start  to  change  the  coefficients. I  want  to  start  to  change coefficients  of  non  basic  variables. A. Well,  the  coefficient  lung based  variable  could  happen  either in  the  course  function  part  or could  actually  in  the  matrix  A  there. There's  several  possibilities  there. We  can  do  it  one  by  one  low, makes  things  easier. In  this  problem,  we  know  that the  basic  variables  is  X  one.  And  x  five. In  the  cost  function, we  know  that  the  C  one corresponding  to  x  one. C  one  could  be  perturbed. Then  in  the  matrix  side, now  in  the  matrix  side, what  could  be  perturbed? Because  X  five  actually  changed. Now,  what  actually  could happen  that  related  to  the  x  five? You  think  about  low. A  let  me  just  try  to  see  now. Actually  this  write  down  they actually  only  consider's  p  of  x  one. We  don't  really  worry  about  x  i because  y  is  snack  variables. That's  fine.  Now  we  have several  the  variable  entries  we  can  change. A  one,  one,  a  21,  three, they  are  all  in  the  same  column, the  first  column,  corresponding  to  x  one. Let's  try  to  just  x  example. We  start  to  change  things  to  x  one. Now,  the  first  scenario is  that  I'm  going  to  only  change  C  one. I  will  keep  the  A  matrix  unchanged. A  matrix  unchanged. But  I'm  going  to  change  C  here. Actually  only  changes  C  one. The  C  two  is  the  same. Now  the  C  will  transform  from the  C  two  sub  that  changed, where  the  first  value, the  C  one  is  changed  3-3  plus  data. Now  I'm  going  to  bring  this  sub  C into  this  table  into  this  table. Then  I  want  to  ask  myself. Um  once  you  put  it  in  the  hole. If  you  put  it  in,  that's actually  the  final  table  look  like. At  this  point,  you  cannot stop  because  you  are  not really  sure  you  should  stop  or  not. Because  data  now  appearing  in  the  last  role. Try  to  recall  my  objective  is  to  make  sure the  synplex  method  we'll maintain  the  same  S  matrix and  the  same  y  matrix, and  also  we  will  try  to  maintain the  same  basic  variables. Unchanged.  I  want  to  still maintain  X  and  X  two, X,  and  x  four, S  my  basic  variables. Now  I'm  going  to  ask  myself, what  kind  of  data  I  should  choose? I  know  that  to  make  this  guy, I  really  hold  the  conditions  that I  need  to  make  sure  the  last  row has  to  be  all  non  negative. Because  at  this  moment, if  this  all  non  negative, then  this  table  will  be  the  final  table. The  simplic  method  will terminate  at  this  table  there. Therefore,  if  I  look at  all  the  gre  in  the  last  row  here, and  this  is  the  only  suspicious  part. If  I  can  set  this  one  to  be  non  negative, then  I'm  done.  I'm  done. I'll  guarantee  that  if  you set  the  Data  is  within  this  range, then  this  is  the  last  the  simplest  table. No  further  change.  Then  you  also  know  that in  the  cases  the  album  of  value is  this  guy.  No  change. Okay.  Good.  This  is very  simple.  Now,  what  happened? If  somehow  I'm  going to  make  things  more  complex, I'm  going  to  start  to change  the  first  column  of  A  matrix because  this  one  is  corresponding to  the  X  one. Y  is  a  first  and  non  basic  variable, sins  getting  even  more  complex, I'm  also  deal  with  the  C  one  as  well. I  will  make  the  C  also  change. I'm  going  to  protect  both  the A  matrix  and  the  C  vator. Then  what  about  happen? I'm  going  to  still  maintain the  same  S  matrix. In  other  words,  I  don't  want  to  change my  the  elementary  rule  operations. Maintain  S.  Also, I'm  going  to  maintain  y  as  well. Don't  change  these  two  guys. Then  I'm  going  to  analyze  after  I adjust  of  perturb  the  A  matric  and  C  vector, what  is  the  final  table  look  like? You  just  calculate  based  on  this  one  hole, based  on  this  one  hole,  you calculate  term  by  term, plug  them  into  the  table. Then  you  have  the  one  new  table  here  now. I  think  that  it's  not really  written  here  now. But  I  think  that  we  can  calculate. I  here, it  doesn't  really  give  you  all  the  details, but  we  can  actually  work  out the  details  together. You  can  see  that  in  this  table, L  et  me  just  see  here  in  this  table  there. The  y.  I  can  write  it  down  here. I  mean,  otherwise,  it's  getting actually  let  me  try  to  see  how  do. We  write  together.  We  write  together  then. Then  everybody  knows  actually  in a  quiz  or  in  the  final  exam, how  do  you  operate? Okay?  But  you  have  to  be  patient.  Let's  see. We  only  care  about  the  last  row  here. First  of  all,  I  know  that  the  C  C here,  transpose  is  what? The  original  C  is  original  what  is  a  C  here? Original  C  is  35. Three,  five  here.  Now  I'm  going  to  change the  C  one  3-3  plus  theta. Actually,  from  this  one is  directly  three  to  four  now. Originally  is  35, but  now  I'm  going  to  change  to  45. This  one  originally  is  a three.  I'm  going  to  change  it. I'm  also  change  my  A  matrix because  originally  a  matrix  equals  to  one. A  matrix  equal  to  what? It's  very  troublesome. I  have  to  keep  up  and  down. This  is  very,  very  inconvenient. What  is  my  A  matrix  here? If  you  take  a  look  at  this,  this  is  my  sue. What  is  my  A  matrix  here? Take  a  look  at  this  one. What  is  my  a  matrix  here? Take  a  look  at  the  inquality  there. What  is  my  A  matrix? Is  what?  One,  zero, Second  row  is  02. The  third  row  is  three,  two. That's  my  a  matrix. Okay.  And  the  augmented  slack  variable is  X  3x4x5. All  right?  That's  why  I  don't  care. Then  from  the  A  matrix  there, and  I  also  know  the  y. So  you  can  see  how  this  is exactly  what  we  are  going  to  operate  now. So  I'm  going  to  calculate y  transpose  times  A  C  here.  All  right. And  minus  c  transpose. That's  actually  what  it  looked  like. The  other  one  is  y  transpose  part, I  don't  care  because  a previous  know  it  works. There's  no  entry  is  a  negative  block. I'm  perfectly  fine  with  this  guy. Let's  just  analyze  what  this  one  give  you. I'm  going  to  bring  in  my  y. What  is  my  y  here? What  is  my  y  here? Y  last  one  is  coming  from  he. M  y  transpose  equals  to  zero,  0  5/2,  right? Everybody,  take  a  look  at. This  is  my  y  here,  052 under  the  snack  variables,  the  last  row  part. Now  I  have  this  one  and  what  is  my  A  C  there? Because  my  A  is  this  guy, and  I'm  going  to  perturb the  first  column  here. The  AC  now  equals  two, copy  the  second  one,  no  change. But  what's  the  first  one  changed? They  actually  say  that  well, the  A  now  is  actually  changed  to  the  here. From  10,  three  become  102,  102  here. Now  I  got  everything.  I  got  a  y,  I  got. I  got  the  CC  there. Now  I'm  going  to  calculate, so  I'm  going  to  use  zero, zero,  5/2  times  AC, 102,  022, minus  the  C  transpose  here  is  four  and  five. Because  the  y  se  change  is  the  same. The  second  column  of  the  A  matrix still  the  same  and  the  c  vector, the  second  entry  is  still  the  same. Based  on  the  previous  calculation, the  resulting  entry  value  will  not  change, and  definitely  is  non  negative. That's  why  they  don't really  bot  the  consider. But  anyway,  we  do  it  together now.  This  one  give  you  what? Zero,  zero,  things  times  give you  five,  everybody  together  now. This  one  also  five, minus  four  and  five, end  up  with  one  and  zero. What  does  that  mean? 10?  Where  should  I  put  10? If  I  look  at  this  table, and  where  should  I  put 10?  These  two  entries. Forget  about  this,  this  one  is  different  but actually  the  10  should put  into  these  two  entries. The  remaining  no  change. Therefore,  after  you  put  10  come  in, you  know  the  last  row, everything  is  no  negative. That  means  On  this  disturbance, nothing  changed.  Nothing  changed. Your  original  solution  is  still  optimal, and  even  your  optimal  cost  function  value still  maintained  the  same.  No  change. This  disturbances  no  impact to  your  problem  at  all. Then  we  can  actually  make  things even  more  drastic. Okay.  Now  we're  going  to start  to  make  the  C  two. Now,  start  to  change. And  then  also  make  the second  column,  start  to  change. Then  I'm  going  to  recalculate, recalculate  the  table,  again, just  use  the  same  method. Okay  Idntify  the  S, identify  the  y,  identify the  AC,  dntify  the  CC. Then  you  try  to  analyze  the  last  column. Where  is  the  last  column  here. Actually  only  focus  on  this  part. Because  my  y  never  changed, I  don't  bother  about  the  net or  nonnativity  of the  entre  is  covered  by Y.  I  only  care  about  the entries  covered  by  this  guy. Make  sure  that  the  must  non  negative. Okay.  Now  if  you  bring  the  values  coming  in, you  realize  that  this is  actually  what  you  got. Bring  all  this  computation  coming  in  there. The  last  row  still  or  non  negative. What  does  that  mean?  Now  means the  problem  even  under this  kind  of  a  perturbed. The  second  column  change  and  so  on, there's  nothing  changed  to my  problem  solution.  Same  thing. My  basic  variable  is  still maintained  as  the  basic  variable  still. Actually,  actually. In  this  case,  O  previous  one  is  X  two, X,  X  four,  they  are  they  are  basic. Now  actually  you  realize  that  one  of  the  guy, x  two  now  become  a  non  basic, I  cannot  stop,  Bre  now  here. In  this  table,  no  means  I cannot  stop  here  because  I want  my  original  basic  variable  X two  still  maintain  basic. But  here,  this  guy  is  not  a  basic  anymore. I  need  to  make  this  one back  to  the  basic  variable. But  how  do  I  do  that? You  try  to  recall, try  to  recall  the  previous in  the  previous  position  here, my  pivot  entry  is  this  guy. I  need  to  re  reproduce  zones. I  need  to  force  this  guy still  be  the  P  bird  entry. E  to  make  sure that  the  solution  will  still  be  maintained. Now  we  will  see  whether this  one  can  be  done  or  not. Therefore,  say,  I  will  force this  entry  to  be  one  now because  it  will  become  a  Pb. I'm  going  to  use  elementary  row  operation to  make  all  other  entry  to  be  zero. Then  we  will  see  whether the  optimaty  or  termination of  the  simplex  method  will  change. If  it's  a  change,  then  you  know  that this  perturb  indeed  caused the  whole  change  of the  problem  solutions  there. The  problem  cannot  take  this  disturbance. You  just  basically  apply the  elemental  operation, you  realize  that  yes,  indeed. Everything  changed. This  guy,  you  have appearing  a  new  non negative  term  coming  in  now. That  means  that  from  this  moment, the  basic  variable  set  B  of the  original  problem cannot  be  maintained  anymore. The  problem  under  this  disturbance, they  cannot  maintain  oimity. The  disturbance  test  fails, or  you  say  the  problem  is  not robust  to  this  kind of  a  specific  disturbance. That's  how  you  do  the  analysis  law. Try  to  understand  how  do  I  read  this  table? I  want  to  make  sure  the  same  S  matrix, the  same  y  vector  and derive  lead  to  the  same  x  B  set. If  either  one  of  this  guy  changes, that  means  my  original optimal  solution  changes. That  also  means  that  my  problem is  not  robust  to  this  specific  disturbance. That  actually  is  a  conclusion  you  can  make. For  this  example,  you  know  that  indeed the  final  basic  variable  changes X  one  will  come  into  picture. Then  you  don't  bother because  you  know  this original  original  automatic, we're  not  maintained  anymore. You  can  continue  to  operate until  you  find  a  new  solution, that's  final.  No  issue  there. But  this  one  is basically  another  syplex  problem has  nothing  to  do  with  the  original  one. Now  you  try  to  recall what  we  have  done  so  far. When  I  do  the  sensitive  analysis, then  I  have  a  clear  goal. First,  I  need  to  already  solved  one  problem. I  already  identify  the  collection of  all  the  metric  row  operation, which  is  summed  into  the  S  matrix. Oder  the  snack  variable  state. Also  I  have  the  last  row, the  y  vectors  corresponding to  the  snack  variable  step. I  have  these  two  things, and  then  I  also  have  my  x  B, the  collection  of  all  the  basic  variable, which  is  maintained  of  the  last  step. Now,  I  can  start  to  perturb all  these  parameters  in ABC,  the  three  matrix. And  I  want  to  guarantee  that  if  my  problem under  what  conditions  my  problem is  robust  to  your  disturbance. In  the  sense  that  my  S  matrix  no  change, my  y  vector,  no  change, my  x  B  set,  no  change. I  have  to  make  sure  all  the  B  vector  side has  to  be  all  non  negative. All  right.  I  already  said quite  a  few  sentences  there  now. Okay.  Take  a  look  at  this  one  here. One  more  time,  before  we  close this  session  there.  One  more  time  here. All  right.  When  I do  all  this  disturbance  there, you  can  actually  apply  to  ABC  simultaneously. No  problem.  You  can  introduce  the  data. Data  12,  the  B  or  Data  two  to  the  C, Data  three  to  the  A  matrix. Make  it  more  general. Then  once  you  derive  into the  final  this  table  there, what  my  goal  is  that,  I  want  to make  sure  that  S  is  no  change. Y  is  no  change,  and  this  column, S  B  says  everything  is  non  negative. I  want  this  B, the  set  is  no  change. If  you  can  maintain  these  properties, then  I  will  say,  of  course,  the  last  one. The  last  row  has  to  be  all  nonnative. If  you  can  maintain  all  these  properties, then  you  can  conclude  that  this, the  solution  of  this  problem  is robust  to  the  disturbance  you  impose. If  any  disturbance  is  big  enough to  break  one  of  the  property  I  mentioned, then  you  know  that  the  prop  solution  is  not robust  to  that  specific  disturbance. If  I  ask  you,  what  kind  of value  of  the  data  will force  the  optimal  solution  change? You  know  how  to  answer  that,  right? Previously,  I  asked  you  what  kind  of data  will  not  change  the  optimal  value. That  opposite  will  be the  opposite  condition  will  be the  one  will  change  the  optimal  solution. You  got  to  be  sensitive.  If  I slightly  changed  the  way  to  speak, then  you  shouldn't  know  how  to  answer  that. Okay?  All  right.  That  one  actually, I  would  say  The  rickest  one, I  think,  right  ricket  one  in  this  part. The  rest  part  is  very  straightforward. Okay.  So  I  will  stop  here  now  because  I  ya, You  see  that  this  is  actually something  more  complex  coming  in. You  can  take  a  look  at  home.  All  right. If  you  cannot  figure  out  why they  derive  in  this  manner, you  send  e  mail  to  me. I'm  going  to  also  go  through some  exercise  problem  next  week. Before  we  talk  about  the  new  topic. Next  week,  I'm  going  to  start  with 1  hour  for  the  exercise. You  have  some  time  to  practice. I  don't  have a  specific  assignment  for  this  part. Only  have  one  quiz. Okay.  So  if  you  understand all  the  things  in  my  classroom, I  think  you  are perfectly  fine  for  the  Quiz  one. Right.  Okay.  Yeah. Alright,  I  will  end  up  here. Thank  you  very  much. Yeah.
