Let me do a sound test. Can I check if you can hear me from the back, right at the back. Am I audible all the way to the end? I also want to check because my voice is not in the best of shape. When you just recover from a sore throat or whatever throat infection, you have to be cautious about exerting too much of the vocal cords. So hopefully the signal to noise ratio is acceptable such that you can hear. If I put the gain too high, then some of the words may muffle, and it may not be so clear. Let's do our best and see if we can run through what we are supposed to do today.

This is the first day of the semester or even the academic year. And I hope you are in the right class. This is EE6407. My name is Lim, with the School of EEE. I put down my office number and my e-mail. Anytime, any short queries, it's okay to drop me an e-mail, but there's no guarantee that a reply will be very prompt, especially when you tend to overlook things when you are served with e-mails. So if you drop an e-mail and you feel that it's urgent enough, you can drop a reminder. You may also stop by my office to talk to me if you need to. But I presume, what I've seen, is that most of the materials are actually quite okay, quite manageable. I hope it won't be too taxing.

So the title of this is Genetic Algorithms and Machine Learning. I wonder if the question that pops up, you say, this course is about machine learning, but how come suddenly the genetic algorithms pop up together in the title. Is it just to fill up the hours or what? Well, you'll be surprised, or maybe not. They are actually very closely intertwined. Of course, machine learning, you're going to cover a lot of it when the second-part lecturer takes over. But genetic algorithms is very closely associated to machine learning also. Many problems in machine learning can be formulated as a GA problem, or genetic algorithm problem.

So along the way, you will see that some of the terms we're going to use. We say genetic algorithm, but sometimes, very often, you say evolutionary algorithm or evolutionary computing. So these terms, although strictly speaking there are some differences in the terms when you use it, but they are not important. What is important is that we are specifically looking at a class of techniques that is inspired by nature, by biology. How is that? Well, as we go along, I think it will become very apparent as to how that inspiration from nature is put into practice in a computing mode or computing environment to solve practical problems.

So although my part is only four weeks, I presume through these three or four weeks, it should be enough to give you an understanding such that you can even use it to deal with problems that are relevant to your research.

Now, you may ask, if you need a reference book. If you look at this small icon here, this is the book where I got the lecture materials. I was fortunate because the author is a good friend of mine, so I was able to use it quite freely in a way.

It will be natural to ask how are you going to be assessed or evaluated? Since the first class, I think it makes sense to have a good understanding of the mode of assessment. So there are essentially two parts, continuous assessment, which is done throughout the course, which consists of 40%. And then the final exam is towards the end of it, which takes up 60%. So that 60% is just towards the end, the whole subject combined. Of course, the weightage is higher, 60%. So you have to go through all the materials in order to be able to do reasonably well in the exam. But having said that, continuous assessment is also very, very important. It constitutes a significant portion such that quite certainly it will make a difference in the grades. And I certainly hope that the continuous assessment will serve to help boost up your grades rather than to try and pull you down. Because quite often also, you may need help, depending on your results or how you do in your final exam.

So continuous assessment, 40%. During my four weeks, I will give you one quiz. As far as continuous assessment is concerned, only one quiz. No homework. No assessment on your attendance. Attendance, you decide. As far as I'm concerned, to assess you on continuous assessment, there's only one, which is a quiz. So the quiz is a closed book quiz in a controlled environment, written. And it will be held on the last week, number four. That's the end of my part. So week number four, we run a quiz. And then after that, the next lecturer takes over for the remaining of the subject. That's as far as the assessment goes. Quite straightforward, I would say.

Now, no homework, again, I emphasize. Some of you will be wondering, where's my homework? Many may like homework, which is not wrong because homework is a way to practice, also to test your understanding. But the nature of my part, I would like to put it in such a way that it is actually something you can relate to, if you really understand the scope or the context of what is covered. You can relate to it because it is actually quite easily relatable to real life situation also. And I try to make it that way by throwing in examples now and then, practical examples.

Let's dive into the topic that is of interest to us. That's genetic algorithm. But here, I call it evolutionary computing. You'd be surprised to know, genetic algorithm is actually a specific technique within the umbrella of evolutionary computing. That means that evolutionary computing is a more general, more generic term, which covers genetic algorithm. But then it's quite strange. Whenever we talk about such kind of technique, we always say genetic algorithm. Rather strange in that way. But then when we understand the development of the evolutionary approach, then you will realize that there's a good reason why this is so. It has to do with the popularity of the techniques. When enough people use it, everybody start using the GA part of the evolutionary computing, then it dominates, and people say, oh, I'm using a GA method. So that is all. But as far as I'm concerned, I will use terms like evolutionary algorithm, evolutionary computing, genetic algorithm, all in a very interchangeable manner. But they are taken to mean the same thing.

What does it mean to evolve? When you say evolution, to evolve means to change. Maybe today, I'm clean shaven. Two days later, you see I'm full of hair on my chin. Is it correct to say I've evolved? Probably not. So it's not wrong to say "to change", but it's not that kind of change that you talk about every day. When you say evolution, the implication is that it is a change over a different time scale. So the context of what we're talking about, evolution would be, for example, in nature, how species evolve, making gradual adjustment with time. So there's a context of evolution. Don't think simplistically, just as "change", it's not that. It's beyond that.

Now, computing. So how we actually use the metaphor in evolution and put it into a computational approach, such that we can solve useful problems. So that's the realm of what we are trying to do in evolutionary computing.

Essentially, when you are professionals, or you're going to be a professional, what do you do? What are you trying to do? Or what are you usually tasked to do? To deal with problems. If there's no problem, there's nothing for you to do. So the whole crux of all this is that you're solving problems. Real problems. So when you solve problems, obviously, you look for a technique such that the problem can be handled effectively. Now, before you do that, I think it makes a lot of sense if you have some understanding on the nature or the characteristics of the problem. What type of problem are you dealing with? How do we characterize, how do we classify? Here we're going to attempt to do a classification of the types of problems to be solved.

So we're going to attempt to use four different characteristics to characterize the problems. Number one, we're going to look at the black box model. Black box, everybody knows. When you say something is a black box, what does it mean? Well, essentially what it means is this. I have a system, usually I have input and output, and I have a technique that transforms the input to the output. Now, inside this technique, or what we call the model, we don't really know. It's a black box. And we don't care, because it does a job. For any input, it gives us the desired output. So there's a black box we are talking about. Now, when we classify the problem according to the black box, the whole crux of it is we break it down into three parts. There's the input, the model itself, and then the output.

Now, another way to look at problems would be in terms of looking at it as a search problem. The word search means to look for something. In this case, you look for a solution. So when you're doing a search, what are you interested in? You'll be interested in how big the problem is. How many possibilities am I talking about? Because you are looking for a solution. So it makes sense to try and get a grasp of how big, how complex is the search space. So there's another perspective you can look at in terms of classifying the problem.

The next one we can look at would be from the optimization angle, and then from a constraint satisfaction angle. Optimization, we all know. To optimize means to come up with a solution that uses whatever resources that you have efficiently. That's optimization that you're trying to achieve. So you go from point A to point B. You're trying to optimize the path or the route. That means that you're trying to find a path such that it gives you the shortest time to go from point A to point B. Quite clearly there is some objective you're trying to achieve, this optimization.

Now constraint is a little bit different. What is the constraint? Constraint is a requirement. It is a condition. Constraint satisfaction means this condition is satisfied, this requirement is satisfied. So your problem usually come with many, many requirements or constraints. So when you see it as a constraint satisfaction, you will look at it as a problem: how much can you satisfy all the constraints? I'm not talking about five constraints or ten constraints. The problem could be like thousands or millions of constraints. So that will be from a constraint satisfaction angle.

Now, the final approach on classifying a problem. You probably have heard of the term NP, especially if you have some programming background. NP refers to non-deterministic polynomial. Essentially, in layman's term, we want to know or understand how difficult the problem is. So in the last approach, if you want to look at how difficult is the problem, you want to classify according to the difficultness of the problem.

Now, in particular, this kind of classification is very useful in the type of problems that are discrete in nature. So later on, I'll give a little bit of explanation about what we mean when we say it's a discrete kind of problem. The opposite of discrete, of course, is continuous. Just a quick note to say continuous problem means that your variables are continuous values. Discrete means that the solution actually takes on discrete values like integers, for example. One thing that strikes your mind very clearly is, if it is continuous, the space is infinite. If it is discrete, discrete is theoretically finite. If it is discrete. But then there may be a trap. It could be discrete, it's theoretically finite, but yet it can present itself as one of the most difficult problem to solve. So in particular, our NP approach of classification is probably more applicable to discrete type of problems.

So hopefully by the end of the day, you have a clear understanding or clear picture on the motivation or the rationale for these different ways of classifying problems. So that's what we want to do. First understand the problems, right from the perspective of the problems, how do we classify and categorize it.

The first one is black box model. We want to classify it by thinking of problems or systems as just a black box model. So three parts. In a problem solving system, you have input, output, and then you have the model, the technique for solving it. So when one of them is missing, meaning the input, model, or the output, it presents itself as one type of problem.

So let's jump straight into it. First scenario, let's say if you don't have the input, or put it another way, in this problem, you're trying to find the best input that meets certain objective requirement. So this kind of problem, when you're looking for the input, this is what we call the optimization problem. So optimization problem is usually driven by a certain objective of what you are trying to optimize. So you're looking for the best input such that that objective is the best, or most optimal.

So better to have some examples to look at. Everybody knows timetabling. You all have a timetable, timetable for university, call center, or even a hospital rostering or manpower. Many, many other scenarios. You can see timetabling as being applicable. Let's talk generally about university timetabling. Usually in timetabling, what are you trying to optimize? What can you think of as the objective? When you talk about optimization, one clear notion that strikes you would be that usually there is something limited in terms of the resources. It's limited. If it is unlimited, there's nothing to do, actually. Usually there's something limited. Then because it's limited, you got to try and come up with a solution that makes efficient use of limited resources. What is limited in timetabling? For example, in the university timetabling. We are in a lecture theatre. How many LTs are there? At this point in time, I'm having a hard time finding an LT for a quiz. So it's limited. The physical resources is usually one of the clear limitations. What are the other limitations that you can think of? The number of hours. How many hours do you have? Within one day, you have 24 hours, but even within the 24 hours, maybe only 8 hours are usable, the rest of it probably is your own time and so on. So maybe that's from a student's perspective. Now, what about, let's say, faculty? You only have a certain number of faculty headcount. So there's also another resource that is limited. So the point I'm trying to make is that it is clearly a form of optimization. So when we talk about optimization, what is it that we are optimizing?

Design synthesis. GA can be a very powerful tool in doing design. So you can pose a design problem as an optimization problem. And you'd be surprised, the amazing results. You can use it, for example, to design filters, or the shape of a car. Many different design problems.

And the others are classical kind of problems, examples like a traveling salesman problem. Given n number of cities, find a path for the salesman to visit each and every city once and only once, with the minimum cost. Classical computer science kind of problem. The other one is more like a game board, the eight queens. Eight queens was introduced to solve or to illustrate the backtracking algorithm. So when first presented, eight queens itself was a challenge. But these days, eight queens is not a problem at all. It's very easy.

Back to timetabling again. Let's talk a little bit more about the timetabling. In particular, the university timetabling, usually the search space is huge. There are many, many different possibilities. So quite clearly it is an enormously big search space. So what we also want is a good timetable. What is a good timetable? Well, a good timetable, at least it must fulfill all the requirements. The requirements in terms of resources, that is a non-negotiable type. If I have X number of rooms, that's it. I can only use X number of rooms. You cannot say, can I have X plus one? X is X. So that would be the requirement. So those are good timetables.

But there's another type of requirement, especially in timetabling. So there are some requirements, as I just said, that are non-negotiable. Must do. Must have. There's another type of requirement, which we call the soft requirement or soft constraint. Soft means that when you solve it, you'll be better if you can fulfill that requirement. But if you cannot, the solution is still a feasible solution. That's a soft requirement. For example, if let's say you schedule my teaching hours. If out of the 8 hours, every hour is one right after another. On paper, it looks like a workable timetable. But you know there's a preferred way, and having continuously 8 hours of teaching, that's no good. But it is a constraint, a soft constraint. If really, really no choice, maybe on a certain day, let's run it that way. So there will be soft constraints.

So collectively, when you look at the timetable, what is a good timetable? Of course, those that satisfy the hard constraints, the non-negotiable type. Now, the goodness of the timetable, you also have to think about the other, the soft type of requirements. So how much can you satisfy? So that will be a way to determine how good a timetable is. So be clear about the nature of many problems where there are constraints or requirements that are hard requirements, and there are also what we call the soft requirements. So again, soft requirements or soft constraints, if it's not satisfied, it's still a feasible solution. Although not a preferred solution, but it's a feasible solution.

And the optimization. Let's say you want to design a mechanical structure for a satellite. So you can use GA to solve this as an optimization problem. Whenever you solve it as an optimization problem, there's usually some objective that drives the optimization. In this case, you want to maximize vibration isolation. A good structure will have minimal vibration. That's essentially what we are saying here.

So if you are using an evolutionary approach, you'll be evolving the different design structures. You evolve different design structure, and each structure, how good, how bad, you check the vibration. So to check the vibration, either you have the physics model to determine the vibration, or you use an estimation, you have a simple model just to estimate the vibration. So therefore, you must have a way to estimate how good it is. So that will constitute the fitness. Fitness is closely associated to the objective value, the objective of what you're trying to optimize. So that fitness will be the vibration resistance.

Now, the by far most interesting thing about GA in design is what we call the evolutionary creativity. What does it mean when we say you are very creative? Or if you are not creative, what's the tendency? We have a problem. Say this guy is creative, as compared to another guy who's not creative. What would you expect from somebody who is creative and somebody who is not creative? I would like to think that, for being non-creative, whatever solution that you come up with, quite likely you may meet the requirements, but it won't be a very interesting solution. It will be very closely or similar to what is already known. You get my point. If it's not creative, chances are it's quite predictable, it will work, it will fulfill the condition or the objective. That is not creative, but it solves the problem. If there's really creativity, if you say this person is creative, then what you may expect from him is that he will come up with a solution that has a high chance of being very different from what is known or what other people have done. That's creativity.

So if you think about GA or evolutionary algorithm, when it evolves the structure, does it really care about how the structure look like? It doesn't really care. Because all it's doing is driven by that objective, that whatever structure that comes up with will try and minimize the vibration. That's all it cares about. Now, because of that randomness in generating the solution, GA is known to be what we call creative in that sense. It comes out with a very interesting solution. There is evolutionary creativity.

When you do fashion design, you're a fashion designer. I think chances are a lot of your new designs may be quite close to what was before, what has already been done. If you explore a little bit, why not use the evolutionary approach? So in that sense, evolutionary approach can be a good candidate to evolve fashion, based on the fashion sense or theme. You look around, there are many design problems that use GA to do it. Like even in evolutionary art, or jewelry, designing jewelry, or any other structures. So that is how GA comes into play in evolving design structures.

Again, just to summarize this point. Why is it an optimization problem? It is an optimization problem because we formulate it as an optimization problem, because in optimizing it, our sole objective is to minimize the vibration of the structure. So optimization always has an objective that drives the optimization.

Simple example, the n-queens problem. Everybody can relate to it if you know what a chess mode is, or you know what a queen is. Just in case you haven't touched chess before. Well, a queen is a chess piece that commands vertically, horizontally, diagonally, and diagonally both ways. So that's what a queen commands. So if you put two queens on the same diagonal or the same column, that means that they are in a mutually attacking position. So the problem in the eight queen optimization is to place all the eight queens such that no two queens attack each other. First formulated to solve or to demonstrate what we call the backtracking algorithm.

So just as a quick test, do you see this configuration as mutually non-attacking? This configuration that is shown, do you see any attacking pairs? Looks like there isn't any, or looks like there may be some attacking. So we're going to use the n-queens problem to illustrate a lot of the concepts or ideas. In particular, I will show you how to do the formulation of the n-queens problem. When we say to formulate, means to put it in a form where you can actually code it, in terms of, you can write equations to define the fitness, on how you would calculate. So you look at this here. Quite clearly, you can see this one and this one. They are in a mutually attacking position. Beyond that, not sure, there's another one here. So those will be the mutually attacking queens. So of course, it simply says that this configuration does not satisfy the eight non-attacking eight queens.

So there's optimization. Now let's consider the middle portion, that is, the model itself is missing. So in the classification according to the black box, if your problem is such that you are looking for the model, then that is a modeling problem. Many of your problems in machine learning are modeling problem. That is quite clearly so because I know many of you have done neural networks. You always look for training samples. Your training samples say, this is the data, the input, and this is the expected output. So that expected output can be data that you accumulate, or you could be the one labeling it. Especially in classification, you say, this input here is a certain class, class one. The next input, class two. So you do the tedious task of labeling. And so obviously in your neural network problem solving, what are you looking for? You're looking for the model. So the problem of training a neural network, that is a modeling problem. So you're looking for a model. And this model, after you solve it, is actually just the interconnection between the different neurons and so on. And how those neurons connect, the details, you don't really care. So in that sense it is a black box.

So here you see, this is machine learning. So many problems in modeling, especially if you come from the GA angle. Especially when you are very strong in GA, quite often you can formulate many of the problems out there as a GA problem or GA optimization.

So modeling problem. For example, evolutionary machine learning. Now think about it. GA is optimization. Optimization, usually you have a certain objective. You want to try and optimize or minimize or maximize whatever it may be. Let's say you are training a neural network. In training a neural network, you do iterations until you find a set of weights that gives you the correct association between the input and output. That's training a neural network. What if you look at it as an optimization problem? How would you approach the problem? Well, if that neural network training is an optimization problem, essentially what you will be doing is that you will find a set of weights. So in your GA, you have many samples of these weights. And then you test each set of weights. And then based on each set of weights, you test or you measure or you determine the error or inaccuracy between the desired output and the output that you get. So when you optimize, you try to optimize such that the error is minimized. So in that sense, you have presented the problem of training the neural network as an optimization problem.

Predicting stock exchange. You know what is time series data? Your stock data every day, and the equities that are traded. So those are your time series data. So in your time series data, let's say you want to build a model to do prediction. Prediction means, I want to predict what is the likely valuation or price the next day. So the basis of my prediction is based on historical data or past data. So I build a prediction model. This model, I can solve it or I can present it as an optimization problem. So I'll build it, it could be rules, it could be like even a neural network. So I'll build a model such that the error based on the past data, the error between the expected output and the output based on the model that I have, is minimized. Once you have the model, then it becomes a prediction tool for you to predict future events that is going to occur. Like your voice control systems in smart homes. So for example, a certain device or appliance is activated by voice. You can train it or you can build a model to recognize commands. Many examples you can think of.

Let's look at one more example in terms of modeling, loan applicant credibility. This is quite practical. So when you go to a bank, you ask for a loan. Then the bank would want to know your profile, understand your profile, based on your earning, whether you own a house, and so on. So then based on that, the bank decides whether to loan you or not. Now, what if the bank wants to replace it with a program. So that program, based on past historical data or events in terms of loan being disbursed. So this past data can be used to build a model for the bank. So when you build a model, you must recognize the fact that that model, the representation of it can be anything. It could be just a set of rules, or it could be a neural network. It could be some equations or closed form representations on how you associate the input and output, and so on.

So optimization when you don't have the input, is a modeling problem when you don't have the model, it is a simulation problem when we have the input, we have the model, and the output we don't know. So we can consider some examples where this scenario may be applicable. So you have the input, you have the model. So you will be posing the scenario where you say, what if my input is this, what kind of output will I get? So based on a certain model, if I give you this model, if I give you this input, what could be the expected output? Well, you will only know the output if you simulate according to the parameters that's given.

Then you would ask, what kind of systems or situations would require you to do such kind of simulation? So here are some examples, particularly in a very dynamic environment. Evolutionary economics. Artificial life. You have a new tax system. Let's say I want to see the effect of tax incentive, how it can affect the population. So what do I do? I assume whatever tax incentive, and what kind of effect is going to result? And then eventually I see what kind of output that comes out of it. In artificial life, weather forecast system. What if the humidity change in a certain region, what's going to happen? How is it going to affect on a wide scale, the wind, or the weather in general? And impact analysis on new tax systems.

So the point to make is very simple. There are many problems in real life where you cannot build a physical model to validate. You can simulate to predict or estimate the behavior, but it's not possible to build a physical model.

Perhaps the next couple of examples may illustrate. You can build artificial societies, which are going to evolve. Now, how is it going to evolve? Well, it depends on what your objective is. For example, you can simulate trade, economic competition, and so on. So in this artificial society, one of the clear objective would be, you're trying to calibrate a model. Because your objective is that you want desirable characteristics that come out of it. So we can use models to optimize the strategies and the policies, like in policy making, decision making.

So the forces that are at play, survival, strong ones gobble up the weak ones, big fish, small fish kind of scenario. So this kind of society, assuming you simulate it, can you build a physical system? No. From a biological perspective, say we know that incest prevention keeps evolution from rapid degeneration. This is known. So there's no physical system. Multi-parent reproduction makes evolution effective. When we talk about reproduction, obviously, there's this inheritance in terms of traits or characters. The children will inherit characteristics of the parents. So logic will tell you, what about multi-parent? That sounds like it's going to work even better, isn't it? You understand my point. So it should work better. Well, it never exists in real life, because it can never exist. But you can do simulation to see if this is indeed so, or is it possibly so. No picture to go with that.

Let's do a few more minutes before we take a break. So far, you've seen that in simulation, we look at one input and then we see what kind of output comes out of it. This is very different from your optimization and modeling. So in optimization and modeling, you are searching for many models, or searching for many, many possibilities. So basically, your optimization and modeling search through huge possibilities. So the search space, if you search through many, many possibilities, you'll be interested to know what the possibilities are, what we call the search space. So if you look at a problem, a problem solving as a search problem, you'll be interested in the search space. Because if you have understanding about the search space, then that becomes information on what you will use in building a technique to solve the problem.

So when we talk about search space, a good example is like when you have a traveling salesman problem, a ten-city traveling salesman problem, how many possible combinations are there? You can literally know how many possibilities. So there's a search space. So when we do these kind of classifications, we see it from the perspective of it being a search problem. Then we'll see we are essentially thinking about the search space as well as the problem solver. In the search space, then we think about how do we find suitable techniques to deal with the problem.

So we have black box, search, and we can also consider it from the perspective of it being optimization as well as constraint satisfaction. Optimization, we all know. You optimize a certain metric or what we call the objective, usually an objective function. What is an objective function? A way of assigning a value to a possible solution that reflects its quality. There's a purpose of an objective function. In other words, how good is this solution? So that is what the objective function does.

Whereas constraint is different. Constraint is a binary evaluation telling whether a given requirement holds or not. Take note, binary evaluation. So if I ask you, this is a constraint, is it satisfied? Usually, the answer is yes, no, binary. It cannot be half satisfied, half not satisfied. Yes or no. That is what a constraint is.

So problems. Many practical real life problems involve constraints. Quite likely they involve constraints. Constraints are those requirements usually imposed by real life situation or scenario. If we put the two together. So your constraints, do we have constraints? We consolidate these two into a simple table like this. So does your problem have any constraints? Or does it involve constraints? Yes or no. Optimization is usually characterized by an objective function. So does your problem have an objective function? Yes or no. If your problem involves constraints and it involves an objective function, then it is called a constrained optimization problem.

So the next scenario. Does your problem have constraints? Yes. Does it have an objective function? The answer is no. So no objective function. So it's not optimization, make sense. So we call this problem a constraint satisfaction problem. So constraint satisfaction, basically, it is a problem that is considered solved if you satisfy all the constraints.

And then the next one, do you have constraints? No. You have an objective function? Yes. Then there is what we call a free optimization problem. Free optimization problem is very easy to illustrate. For example, I say this is a 200-city traveling salesman problem. Find me the minimum distance to visit all the 200 cities. That's a free optimization problem. You're driven solely by the objective of trying to minimize the distance. So there's free optimization, no constraints.

We will look into examples using the n-queens problem and see how we can put it as whether it's a constrained optimization problem, free optimization problem or constraint satisfaction problem. So if you look at the n-queens problem, where do the examples fit? How can we formulate the n-queens problem into FOP, CSP, and COP? We won't do it now, later. When we come back, I'll give you a few examples, or like a poll, to poll you and see, make you consider or think a little bit, how you will see it as a CSP, COP, or FOP. So I suggest let's take a break. And then when we come back, we do a simple question polling kind of situation. Come back around 8:00.

We are back to continue from where we left off. So we were talking about the classification in terms of optimization versus constraint satisfaction. So this table summarizes when you put the two together, how based on whether you have an objective function and constraints, then you can derive three different sub-categorizations.

Now, let's think of the queens problem. Eight queens problem is a problem where you have an 8 by 8 chessboard, and then you are trying to place the eight queens such that they are in a non-attacking manner. Now, of course, the problem can be generalized towards much larger value of n. How big can it go? Well, 100, 500, as big as you want it to be. Of course, as the problem increase, then the size increase, then it becomes more complicated or difficult to find a solution.

Now, every n-queen problem usually have more than one possible configuration where all the queens are placed in a mutually non-attacking position. So here, I want you to look at this. I have a QR code here. I would like you to use this QR code, answer for me a few simple questions pertaining to the queens. So you spend a few minutes to look through it, read the question carefully, and based on your understanding on optimization as well as constraint satisfaction, give your opinion or judge where it belongs to. So don't worry about being right or wrong because all we're interested in is to use it as a platform to analyze further, how we will do categorization.

Okay. We have 197 responses. Maybe there are about 198 people in here. We passed 200.

So let's do some analysis on the questions that were presented in this short poll. So there are four questions here. This is all pertaining to the n-queens problem. So you can see the nature of the different formulation of the n-queens.

Let's take a look at the first question. It says simply: find a configuration of n queens with at least 98% of the total number of queens placed in non-attacking positions. So very simple. For example, 100 queens. What I want is at least 98 queens non-attacking. If it's 200, I want at least 196 queens non-attacking. That's what the question says. So you would do well to take note. If you read the question very carefully, it says, find a configuration of n queens with at least 98% non-attacking positions. So what does that tell you? If I run the algorithm and say, out of 100 queens, I only got 92 queens. Is that acceptable? No. Because the question says, find a configuration with at least 98%. So meaning that you must have at least, let's say 100, you must have at least 98 of the queens in non-attacking. So that means that you're dealing with a constraint.

So amazingly, I think many of you hit it on the nail. It's a constraint satisfaction problem. But let's say, is there a ground to believe or to think that it could be a constrained optimization problem? Perhaps there is. Perhaps you see this problem as not really a solvable problem, for example, n is huge, like 1 million. So you see it as may not be solvable based on the algorithm that you have. So if that's what you believe, then what you will do, you will try and solve it such that you get the best solution. Wouldn't that be what you would do? So you just try and get the best solution, it may not meet the 98%. So in that context, you can see it possibly as a constrained optimization problem. But taking the problem description as it is, it is a constraint satisfaction problem. But, for example, if you describe to me and say, assuming n is huge and may not be solvable, so therefore may not be able to find even the 98%. Then that would be ground to see it as a constrained optimization. So mainly, more likely to be CSP, constraint satisfaction. It's definitely not a free optimization problem.

Take a look at the second one. Maximize the number of non-attacking queens when placing n queens on an n by n board. About 48.5% says it's a free optimization problem. Rightfully so. You want to maximize the number of non-attacks, because your problem solving is driven primarily by the objective of trying to maximize. Then if somebody say, it's only like eight queens, what's there to optimize? Well, we talk about in general. So you want to maximize, for example, if it's 100 queens. You know the maximum in this case, you know the ultimate objective you want to achieve, which is 100. But if you don't achieve the 100, it will be the maximum value you achieve based on the computing time that you have accorded to it. So free optimization would fit the bill quite well in this case.

And the third one. Assume you start out with a random configuration of queens. You are allowed only one move for each queen. And the extent of the movement of each queen should be minimized. So you're asked to make small movement in the position of the queen. So you're asked to reposition the n queen such that the total number of steps involved is minimum and the number of non-conflicting queens is maximized. So what is the objective? Is there a certain objective we are trying to optimize here? So here it says the extent of the movement of each queen should be minimum. For example, if there are ten queens, the total movement, the number of steps of movement of all the ten queens should be minimized. So that's what you want to minimize. Therefore, in that case, it presents itself as more optimization. But on the other hand, there's also another objective, which is to satisfy the constraints. So all these constraints are to have a non-conflicting configuration of all the queens. So essentially you have two objectives here. One is to satisfy that constraint in terms of the non-attacking. And then the other is to try and minimize the number of steps.

Now, this kind of scenario, you may think is very hypothetical. But in essence, in many problem solving, this is actually quite practical, quite normal. So we call this situation similar to a local search. Local search, meaning that you search within the neighborhood. You want another solution, hopefully better than what you have. But with minimum number of adjustment, that's what you are seeking. So a practical example, you deploying your delivery man. You already have a plan. He goes out, or maybe a few of them go out and then deliver accordingly. Suddenly, there's a road closure. Then you have to make adjustments. Are you going to do a whole re-planning? Obviously not. So what you will do is that you make minor adjustment. So we call that minor adjustment, searching for the next local optimum. So in the context of optimization, that is exactly the kind of scenario that is presented in this n-queen tier that we're talking about.

So close to 90% says constrained optimization. There's an objective of optimizing the number of steps as well as the constraints of the non-attacking queens.

The last scenario, positions of three queens have been fixed on an n by n chessboard in a non-attacking manner. Imagine you have a chessboard. N queens. Three of the queens fixed, meaning it must be in this position. Whatever solution you come up with, the three queens remain fixed in a certain position. You are required to maximize the number of non-attacking queens when the remaining n minus three queens are subsequently placed on the chessboard. Here's a catch. Let's say n is 10,000. So the n could be the number of clients or customers. Three customers are special, special treatment. So you fix them. Now you can only shift the remaining, you know, 9,997. You get my picture. So you are required to shift the remaining. So if you read the question very carefully, you are required to maximize the number of non-attacking queens. All you do is just maximize. So of course, the final ultimate would be like the total, all the queens are non-attacking. But what did I tell you? I need a solution within like maybe 1 microsecond of computing time, or 100 iterations. Subject to such kind of requirement. So you don't have the luxury of cranking and so on to find the best solution.

So you're required to maximize the number of non-attacking queens when the remaining n minus three queens are subsequently placed on the chessboard. What do you think? Now that you see the scenario, would you change your mind? Well, about 80% says it is constrained optimization. After hearing what I say, any possibility of you changing your mind? We say maximize. So would you now be inclined to say it's free optimization? Could very much be so. It's free optimization.

So not bad, among the four problems. It is kind of nailed on the head. The last one maybe your perception of it, you need to consider a bit differently. So I hope that illustrates the idea of looking at it from constraint satisfaction and optimization.

Okay, let's move back to our slides. And the next categorization we look at, let's consider the complexity from the perspective of the complexity of the problem. So far, we only look at classifying the problem. We haven't really focused on the problems, isn't it? So in this classification, we need the properties of the problem itself. So what we're trying to do is to have a sense on how difficult the problem is. Not just the problem, but also for aspects of the problem.

This form of classification is very applicable in combinatorial optimization type of problems. Combinatorial problems, where what you're interested in is to seek combinations, arrangements of things. Back to the point I talked about, continuous and discrete problems. Continuous problems, usually, you deal with real value variables or parameters that you are trying to optimize. Your solution will be real values. Whereas in your discrete problems, the solution, the values, the parameter values are actually discrete, for example, integers, any arrangement of integer values, based on a set of integer values and so on. Now, a lot of the problems deal with a situation where you're trying to find an arrangement of the discrete elements. So you're trying to find a combination. So we call that combinatorial optimization.

So NP is very applicable to describe combinatorial type of problems, combinatorial discrete problems. So NP of course stands for non-deterministic polynomial. Polynomial, we know what it is. For example, a polynomial of degree three. So it's like ax cubed plus bx squared and so on. So that's polynomial of degree. Non-deterministic. So it means that you cannot determine for sure what that polynomial is. It's like you asked me, I know this is an NP problem. Then you asked me, is there a polynomial bound for this problem? Then my answer to you would be no, or I don't know. Because it's non-deterministic, NP. So that's the nature of the problem. So henceforth, it is non-deterministic.

So before we go on to the classifications of the problem. In many of these problems, we normally have the problem size. The problem size has to do with the dimensionality of the problem at hand. Usually the number of different values of the variables. For example, your traveling salesman problem, how many cities? Ten cities, 30 cities. So that 30 corresponds to a higher dimension, which correlates to the size of the problem in terms of the search space and so on. Then the run time. So the number of operations that the algorithm takes to terminate. How long does it take? Well, we usually consider the worst case as a function of the problem size. Characterization in terms of n. n could be the number of cities as in the traveling salesman problem. Is it a polynomial, super polynomial, exponential? So if it is polynomial, that's not difficult. It may be a huge polynomial. At least we know for sure, it's a polynomial. Then we can plan our resources accordingly.

Then the next concept would be problem reduction. So this has to do with mapping of a problem from one form to another problem. Example, there are some problems. When you solve the problem as it is, it may be more complicated as compared to when you do the inverse of the problem and then solve the corresponding inverse of the problem. So mapping from one problem, one form to another.

So based on this, we put together four different classes based on the NP-ness. Say the class P. Class P is a class of problems where an algorithm can solve the problem in polynomial time. P is a polynomial. Which means to say the worst case running time for problem size n is characterized by f(n), which is a polynomial. Very easy problem. For example, everybody knows about sorting. To sort a list of items or even names, for example, you have ten names compared to 10 million names, not an issue. There are fast, efficient algorithms. This kind of problem, they are polynomially bounded. Worst case is n squared, which is manageable, is polynomial. Problems that are polynomial are not what we are so concerned with. They are easy to deal with. Those would be the class P where you can characterize using a polynomial formula.

What we are more concerned about would be the class that belongs to the class NP, the non-deterministic polynomial. Basically non-deterministic polynomial refers to a problem that can be solved, and a solution can be verified within polynomial time by some other algorithm. Obviously, P is an easy case. P is just, you can put P as a subgroup under your NP. Among all the NP, there are some that are very simple, that is P. But many of those are what we call NP. So what constitutes NP? We say the problem is NP if I give you a solution, you can verify it in polynomial time. That's NP. Again, NP is non-deterministic polynomial. I don't know what the polynomial is. So we say NP is just a general class when the solution can be verified in polynomial time.

Now, after your class NP, there's another class, that's called NP-complete. NP-complete problem belongs to class NP. It is still a class of NP problems. But what makes it complete? Well, a problem belongs to class NP, and any other problem in NP can be reduced to this problem by an algorithm running in polynomial time. So what are we looking at? We are looking at the mapping. For example, you are tasked to solve a problem that was described to you. Now, because you are an optimization expert, you already solved many problems, you have many algorithms that you have developed over time. So being an expert, you probably have many of these algorithms already at your disposal. Then somebody comes along and say, this is a problem to solve. And of course it looks like a strange, new problem. Then you analyze the problem. Of course, you can straightaway build an algorithm to solve that problem that's given to you. But what if, after tough analysis, you see this problem is similar to one of the problems that you already solved before. You need to convert or transform this problem such that it is solvable by the algorithm that you have. You're mapping it from one to another. The condition that makes it complete is this mapping must run in polynomial time. That's very logical. Even the mapping, if it's not polynomial time, then you might as well just solve that problem as it is. So to make it into NP-complete, the transformation or mapping from that problem that is given to us to another problem, that must be in polynomial time. So that is NP-complete.

Quite often, in real life problem solving, that's what we do. So through the many pieces of work I've done for industry, a lot of the time they come to me, say, this is the problem, the nature of the problem. On my part, I will try and take advantage of the algorithms that I have. So I will try and map whatever the problem there is, and then map it into the form where I can use the algorithms at my disposal.

The last part. NP-hard, hardest. Problem is at least as hard as any other problem in NP-complete. But solution cannot necessarily be verified within polynomial time. I give you a solution. This will be NP-hard. If I throw you a solution, can you verify a solution? How long does it take to verify? If you cannot verify in polynomial time, then that makes it NP-hard. And there's the hardest.

Good illustration example that will make the point very clear. Your traveling salesman problem. Let's say n equal to 100. There is a new problem. Nobody ever solved it before. I say, find me the optimum shortest distance for this hundred city. Why is that hard? Not just in terms of the number of possibilities, the number of possible distances. It is hard to the extent of NP-hard. Remember, I say find me the minimum distance or optimum distance or the best distance. How do you know what's the optimum? What's the minimum? You don't know. When you're running the algorithm, you have a solution. Then you need to ask, is this the minimum? How do you verify it is minimum? Two scenarios. One is that somebody tells you that there's this solution that's better than yours. Then you know straight away, you can prove that's not the minimum. Then you run your algorithm again. Another scenario is that you have no reference, nobody knows, or you don't have a better solution around you. The only way for you to prove that it is not the minimum is to explore all the possibilities. Remember n is 100. So that takes a long time. The worst case is that when it's close to the optimum, to prove that this is not the optimum, you have to literally search through the whole space and find that there's none other better than this. Then only you prove that this is the minimum.

Such is the nature of NP-hard. There are many NP-hard problems available in practical scenario. So many a time, we have many problems where we don't really know what the optimum is. And in a practical sense, we don't really try and solve for the optimum. Our optimality is always qualified with respect to things like how much time does it take for me to get a solution. If it takes me 2 hours, I may get a very good solution, but it's not a practically viable approach. So when we talk about optimality, we must have that understanding in terms of what it means. Optimality in a wide sense.

So this classification here. If you want to depict it in a diagram. There's not much convincing need. P is different from NP-hard. I think we can all accept that. NP-hard, it's definitely different. But what is not known is whether P is different from NP. Remember, I talk about NP-hard is a literally unsolvable problem, the hardest problem. Now, what's not known is whether P is different from NP. Nobody has ever proven yet whether P is NP or not. So if you believe, if we assume that P could be equal to NP, then the way we draw our representation of the problem map would be such: since P equal to NP, then you have the NP-hard that stands out on its own. So if you assume P equal to NP. But what is more likely, what is generally accepted, is that P is not equal to NP. It is generally accepted because there has been no proof yet that P could possibly be equal to NP. But you never know, maybe through quantum computing, the scenario may change or whatever. We say P is not equal to NP. Therefore, the way we represent it would be, you have your general NP problems here and then your NP-hard problems. So overlap, there will be NP-complete. So among the NP, there's the so-called easy kind, which is P. So this is a likely representation of a more realistic scenario.

So how do we deal with this NP-hard? Very tough problem. So how do we deal with it? In reality, many problems out there are NP-hard. That's reality. We solve many of the problems, we deal with many of the problems. Quite certainly, it won't be a very deterministic, exhaustive enumerative approach. It won't work. Therefore, that's why you study genetic algorithms. We use approximation algorithms and metaheuristics. Genetic algorithm is a metaheuristic. It's a heuristic, but not exactly a heuristic. The word "meta" means it is heuristics about heuristics. Or in this case, metaheuristic like the heuristics that exist, or based on the metaphor or the rules that occur in nature, like in evolution.

That brings us to a point where, why all this, why we need all this. So to make you be able to relate to how this can be useful. The classic book by Garey and Johnson talks about complexity and intractability. It starts the book with this scenario, which I thought is very nice to use to illustrate why the understanding of the classification we are talking about is useful. So in the book, before they dwell into the theory behind it, they put forward this scenario.

Imagine one day your boss calls you into his office and confides that the company is about to enter the highly competitive bandersnatch market. For this reason, a good method is needed for determining whether or not any given set of specifications for a new bandersnatch component can be met. If so, construct a design that meets them. Now, because you are the big guy in terms of designing algorithms or problem solving, therefore you'll walk in to your boss's office. So after understanding your problem, you did a lot of background work, went through piles of paper, scratching on papers, and so on, you realize that it's basically quite futile to find an algorithm for the problem.

So but unfortunately, you need to walk in and tell your boss. How do you break it down to your boss? Well, three scenarios are offered in the book. So you walk into your boss's office and say, I just cannot find an efficient algorithm. I guess I'm just not competent enough for this job. The book put it more humorously, say, I guess I'm just too dumb. So imagine, what are you telling your boss? I'm just no good. So I'm useless. That's what you're telling your boss. So that means the boss should fire you, because you are dispensable, in a sense.

Now, imagine you use a different tack. Instead of saying you are too dumb, you walk into your boss and say, I can't find an efficient algorithm because no such algorithm exists. No such algorithm is possible. If that's true, then there's no need to work on it. But do you think your boss is going to buy that? What is the nature and characteristic of a boss? What they care about is whether you can do the job or not. You tell them it's not possible. If you tell them it's not possible, essentially, this is equivalent to telling them that you are not good enough. Yeah, it may be true. There's no such algorithm. But you tell that to your boss, he probably doesn't understand or know about the technical side. So essentially, you're telling him, you're not good enough. So you are dispensable in that sense.

The last scenario, you walk in and tell your boss, I can't find an efficient algorithm, but neither can all these famous people. So you're telling your boss, nobody can solve this problem. But indirectly, what you're telling your boss is this. I cannot solve this problem. I cannot find an efficient algorithm. But, of course, you can fire me. But even if you fire me, you cannot find a replacement. There's nobody that can do this job. That sounds better. Then there's a good chance you may keep your job.

So essentially, I think this scenario illustrate to us: when we solve a problem, it is important to understand the kind of problem, spend some time to understand the problem that you're trying to solve in terms of what kind of problem, the characteristic of the problem, the complexity, and so on. Essentially, that's what we have been doing for the last hour or so.

So there, our motivation or objective is to learn about genetic algorithm. So let's now begin to look at what evolutionary computing is all about. We will look at the historical perspective of evolutionary computing. Then the biological inspiration, an inspiration from nature, as what you observe in living nature. There are two aspects based on the biological inspiration. Number one is the Darwinian evolution. How species or living things evolve. Now, the second aspect that we draw inspiration from would be the genetics, like the DNA we are talking about. The genetics part. So from the genetic part, we draw inspiration on how we would actually do a coding similar to what genes or chromosomes are. So that's why later on, when you see your genetic algorithm, there's this so-called coding of the solutions and so on.

And then the motivation for evolutionary computing. What we would have to be clear about is that genetic algorithm, or evolutionary algorithm, or evolutionary computing, is nothing new. It's not new because since the 1948, or 1950s, 1960s, people have been talking about problem solving through evolution. The ideas has actually been put forward, how you can actually solve problems using more like an evolutionary procedure or approach. But then of course, the idea came out back then, but what's so different at that time compared to now? You must remember we are in an era of computers where we can actually simulate anything that we want. Back in the 60s, the state of computing, the capacity, and so on, is nothing compared to now. So although the idea was there, was put forward for solving problems using evolutionary kind of approach, it was practically not able to be coded such that to demonstrate the full potential or what it can do. In fact, it's only later on, in the 80s, that people begin to look back at some of the earlier proposed evolution approaches and simulate it.

So the whole era of evolutionary computing, the real turning point, why it became so popular or why it is generally accepted as a very powerful technique, is 1975, when genetic algorithms was proposed. In 75, John Holland proposed what we call a genetic algorithm. His ideas was very simple. He represented your solution as binary values, strings of binary values. Make samples of all these strings. We call that a population. Let all these binary strings evolve, through the normal process of reproduction, or he introduced mutation. And the reproduction he used was what we call the crossover, a very simple operation. Take two chromosomes, exchange substrings. So the main novelty when Holland proposed it was actually the crossover. Now, the fact that he used binary strings, this is nice, easy, illustrates the simplicity of the approach. That was a turning point.

After the introduction of genetic algorithm, many people begin to use GA to try out on different type of optimization problem. Now, because of its popularity, because everybody seems to be using GA, whenever they use anything that's evolutionary, they call it GA, a GA for doing this, a GA for doing that. Henceforth, we are so used to it, we say it is a GA, genetic algorithm. That's why we treat GA as more like a general term now. Although, to have a better understanding, you must be clear that GA is just one of the approaches in evolutionary computing techniques.

Then it comes to Koza's genetic programming. The interesting idea on genetic programming is that the coding of it represents a program, like a tree or a finite state machine, whatever it may be. There's a main difference between genetic programming and genetic algorithms.

So how do you see what happens in nature to correlate with something that we can use in problem solving? Well, the basis of that understanding comes from this notion that we live in a world of finite resources. Environment. We have finite resources. Everything is limited. So because it's limited, it can only support a certain number of individuals. The size of the population is limited in that sense. Now, what do we know about life forms? In nature, it is programmed with this basic instinct. Nature is programming this basic instinct, or life cycles, that is geared towards reproduction. The whole survival cycle and the primary driving force is reproduction, to propagate the species. So the driving force. You have a state of limited resources, and you have this hard-wired in nature, that instinct of reproduction. Reproduce means to multiply, to generate more and more. But yet you have limited resources. So how is this to be resolved?

You must have some selection mechanism. There must be a basis for some selection in nature. How do we select? Very simple. Individuals that compete for resources most effectively have greater chance of reproduction. That's how nature is programmed. So those that can compete in terms of getting more resources, compete for the resources, those would be the ones that have a higher chance for survival and reproduction. So that means that if they have a higher chance, it means that they are fit. So what constitutes fitness? Essentially, fitness has to do with the capacity to be able to fight for that limited resources. The more fit you are, the more able you are to fight for that limited resources.

So the final note here is, fitness in natural evolution is a derived, secondary measure. So we assign a high fitness to individuals with many offspring. As far as we are concerned, as consistent with nature, the more offspring they can produce, then they are considered more fit.

And also a little bit more about Darwinian evolution. So the whole physical, the living, and all the code make-up of what we call the DNA and so on. Now, there's this part that has to do with competition, to be able to compete effectively for resources. Now, in nature, how does that come about? We say the fitness and so on. So that fitness has to do with the expression. The physical expression or manifestation of the living thing or the individual. So that physical manifestation is what we call the phenotypic traits, the phenotype. So the phenotypic traits basically refers to the behavior or the physical aspects, or the difference in how it deals with the environment. And how is it determined? Well, inheritance, and also other external factors in the development. So it is also unique to each individual, partly as a result of random changes. So good phenotypic traits generally will lead to higher chances of reproduction. And also because of the reproduction, then the chances of passing on, or inheritance, is better or higher. So it's a manifestation of the expression on how we respond to the real world.

So just summarize a little bit about evolution. So in nature, the unit that we talk about is called a population. So you say a population of species and so on. So the combinations of traits that are better adapted tend to increase representation in the population. So the propagation of the positive traits and how it responds to the environment. In essence, when we do selection, the individuals are actually the units of selection. But the variations occur through random changes, which result in greater diversity. So what we want to see is also diversity. So that when you have diversity, more traits can be represented in the population. Some of the traits are good, some may not be so good and so on.

So when we talk about evolution, evolution of the whole population. When you refer to evolution, it's not evolution of one single individual. It's the whole population that evolves. To evolve means to change. So that change refers to the change of the whole population. So that is evolution. So you can see how, based on that metaphor of evolution, the general idea of how it works. What's the driving force behind the changes? What's the motivation, in terms of what traits or qualities to pass on, propagate and so on. So basically, in essence, it is the phenotypic expressions or the traits that is being passed on during evolution.

The next aspect will be on genetics, how it comes into the picture, how it is used as a metaphor to formulate our algorithms. But perhaps maybe we stop here. So we will just continue the next lecture when we talk towards the evolutionary algorithm, the actual constructs of what evolutionary algorithm is all about. So I'll see you next week. Thank you.
