Good morning. This is the fourth week of lecture. So next week, Prof will be continuing for the remaining of the weeks. So over the past three weeks, we have been talking about genetic algorithm. Today we'll probably be having only half a class because the remaining half is supposed to be a quiz. So today, my agenda is very simple. Let me run through with you just to touch up on what we covered over the past three weeks. And then after that, I will use the time to run through a couple of past year questions, just to give you a flavor of the level of difficulty or complexity. Or you can put it the other way, the level of simplicity of the questions for the exam. So we'll run through it hopefully with sufficient details so that you get a feel for it. And also help you to build up some confidence. And of course, this evening is your quiz. So it starts at 9:30. So perhaps try and be here at least 10 minutes before and settle down. You only need a pen. You only need your pen and show your ID. That's all you need. You don't need calculators. No usage of calculators because there's no need to use calculators.

So today, I will just finish up and then tell you what you're responsible for in the exam. So just like I always have done for the past couple of weeks, I'd like to do a recap on our last lecture. In our last lecture, essentially what we have talked about is just about representation. The focus of last lecture was just about representation. And the different types of representation, and the mutation and recombination operators that are appropriate for the specific type of representation. That was our focus essentially for last week.

So what you've seen is that we look at binary. Always remember binary is the most simple, or is the original GA that we started off with. And binary of course is one and zero. Usually, things are like that when you first started it out, when things are simple, that is very good, because it allows you to develop. Because when the GA first came about, suddenly everybody got interested. It was just a binary GA. But even with binary GA, you saw many types of interesting problems. So particularly those discrete kind of problems. So binary was very effective. Because in the old days, we didn't know how to handle some of these discrete problems. We have techniques, we have deterministic search techniques. Deterministic like, for example, your branch and bound or any other gradient based methods. So when GA came about, wow, the coding so simple, it was just a binary coding. Now, because of the value set, it's just dealing with zeros and one. So the operations are a little bit more simple.

Now, of course, along the way, it's natural that you see other types of problems that are more suitable or more efficient or convenient to be represented in real numbers. Many of the parameters we deal with are actually real, real continuous values. There's just a fact. Of course, we can take the approach of say, converting it or discretize it. But it turns out that many of it are actually more efficiently implemented if they are represented as real values. Case in point, the function optimization problem, the benchmarks are very complex. But in many real world problems, you also deal with approximation or modeling type where it involves optimizing a function. Even, for example, a lot of those like optimization based on real world. Let's say, for example, you have a physics model, you have a quantitative model, and those are a lot of those parameters or let's say in your semiconductor processing and so on. All those parameters are all real world. So continuous. So they are continuous, and essentially we need, like over GA, we need to have a way to vary the values, variation of the values to create the kind of diversity. So we talk about mutation and recombination.

So I want you to be aware of the different types of mutation and cross over involving real values. So even if there are questions that come out of it, I think it won't be too complex. It's more of understanding or seeing the concept of what we are trying to do. So I think so it goes with GA. So it's more of the concept or the ideology that we want in the implementation when we apply it to solve real world problems. So the variation of values, because they are real and continuous, it's not like binary. Binary, you flip it is just one, there's no other choice. But real values, they are infinite number of choice.

So as such, we kind of have three general track. One is fixed, meaning that when you mutate or recombine, you jump into some kind of a fixed deterministic kind of value. The other is of course a random. Random. Just a random over a distribution. What's the new value of it? Well, it's random. And of course, we have the idea of adaptive. Adaptive is interesting. Along the way, you decide. What's the step size you want to use? Maybe there's some, so you can always think, look at it this way. When your algorithm evolve towards a later stage, you're closer to the solutions. So the distributions of the quality or the fitness is going to be tighter. So therefore, intuitively, you would think that the step size you need to be adjusted smaller because you're closer to it. So this kind of tendency or logic can be actually put into like adaptive kind of mutation or recombination.

And integer representation. All right. So many real world problems. Very suitable for integer representation. Like the queens problem. Integer, but more specifically is permutation. But can it be implemented as integer representation? Of course, you can. So the same principles apply. So integer is basically representation of discrete values from a finite value set. Like image processing, RGB, those are discrete values. We use an example of graph coloring. You will notice that a lot of times I ask you to think about the representation, in terms of the fitness. Did you notice that? I put quite a bit of emphasis. Can you write the fitness function? If you can, then chances are you already on the way to solving it already. So think along that track. It's no good to just understand concept like a level where general concept and all. So to go really one step further, think about representation and think about the fitness evaluation. You always ask yourself, how do I represent the fitness? Because fitness is so important. It connects you to the real world problem. The manifestation, the complexity of the real world ultimately goes down to the fitness. That's the bridge to the real world problem. Very important in that sense.

So integer representation of discrete values from a finite value set, permutation. In the last 20 years, I think permutation has become extremely important. Many problems involve sequencing, ordering. Combination. So combination and many of it exists as a permutation from the values of a value set. Permutation. Certain kind of arrangement. Arrangements of the values. And in this kind of problem, the key is the ordering. The ordering of the genes. So which, of course, when you convert it to real world, is entities or representation of different things, like, for example, the cities in your traveling salesman problem. So as such, we also did put quite a bit of attention. So these are things, I think, and some of you have indeed written to clarify a few things about this. Which is good. It shows that you are thinking about it, you are following. So maybe after the class, if you have any more questions, we can use the remaining of the time to clarify. You can come to me or you can openly just ask me anything.

And trees. So tree is also another representation. So the algorithm that we talked about is what we call the GP, the genetic programming. Genetic programming is about evolving, for example, evolving programs. Evolving procedures. So you're searching for procedure steps on how to best solve a problem. Let GA evolve. Let the program evolve the procedural steps, and so on. So of course, we always think about how do you represent it. Trees turn out to be excellent. So I always kind of show you, in my examples, I show you binary trees. Binary trees, one parent, two leaves, and so on. Now, there's a very nice structure because of the recursive nature, because every tree, every subtree. Any node is a, you can break it up into any binary trees. But that doesn't mean that other trees cannot work. You can also have trees where it is more than two, right, binary, arity of two. So but essentially the trees representation, your cross over mutation, you're kind of manipulating subtrees. That's the key concept in your tree representation. So when you think about it, it's very elegant. So as long as you can represent it in tree, maintain that kind of the structure where you define the value set or the terminal set and the functions associated to it. There you have it, you can implement a genetic algorithm that manipulate trees, which can equate to like program procedures or even finite state machines. So that is essentially what we talked about.

So five general categories of representation. And go through as, and I trust that a lot of you are actually doing it from the questions I got. So that's what we did. And I also want to clarify on, so I know I'm going to get quite a bit of questions on this. So we have done until three, representation. We talk about recombination. Recombination and mutation. So it's about manipulating the subtrees. That's the whole idea of tree representation. Of course, after that, you still have some notes on issues about fitness, selection and population management. There are many other issues. In GA, where we focus on fitness, how to rescale the fitness. Or how to manage the population, how to maintain the diversity and so on. Now, I was contemplating whether to carry on to do it, but I decided, maybe we are interested, you look at it, because I know your mind will be thinking more about the quiz. So your preoccupation with the quiz. So having said that, whatever that's beyond this, anything that's beyond this from slide number 60 onwards, I won't test you on exam. So that will relieve you off a little bit. So I think you can guess that.

I think the remaining, we have covered quite a bit on the main parts about genetic algorithm. So we talk about representation, we talk about cross over mutation. So although it's by no means very, very detailed or comprehensive. But it is enough for you to build a good and solid genetic algorithm. Now, the remaining of the issues, like, for example, fitness. So you notice the fitness. Initially, if it is random, the spread of the fitness, how is it going to be? The range, it's going to be wider. Then as you evolve, as the population evolve, it gets closer and closer. Then the spread of it reduce. The diversity in terms of, based on the fitness reduces. What happens to the selection? Initially, that fitness. The spread of the fitness, and then as you move along, it converges because it gets better. Question. From a perspective of selection, because fitness is used for selection. What do you suppose happens? What do you suppose? How is selection going to be? So we say selection is according to the fitness. Obviously. Because of the spread, selection does have a very strong effect on this, correct? Because initially the spread of the fitness is quite wide. Then as you go, towards the later part. The fitness values are not much different because they are generally pretty good. So if they are not much difference, if you use a simple fitness proportionate selection, it's not going to make much difference. Everybody will have about the equal chance. So one of the things we do in GA is, like, we rescale it. One way is to rescale it. To amplify that kind of difference. So that's called fitness scaling. Another way we do it is just to use ranking, just to rank them. If this is 0.78, the other one is 0.76. Based on proportion, is not much different, but if based on ranking, the one that is higher, 0.78 is going to be better than 0.76. So these are all the issues and a lot of it, I think, if you implement GA, you will see it creeping up. And of course, the population management, how to manage the population? Is there a way, other models? Can you split it onto different groups? So we call this island model. We can divide it into subgroup and then they evolve and then exchange between the different groups. So a lot of interesting concepts and ideas, but we won't cover it or we won't talk about it. But to be aware of it, if you are interested, if in your work, you somehow, whatever topics you work on, you somehow stumble upon the idea that maybe GA can be a good way to solve your problem. Then you are aware of such possibilities. So anything beyond 60, we won't cover or you won't be tested. Whatever in the quiz is from the past three weeks.

So let me just use the remaining of the time and go back to maybe a couple of past exam questions. I want to enlarge this, there you go. This is back in 2023. 2023. This is on academic year 22, 2022, Semester two. So there's a question here. So we look at this particular question. Both of my questions are original, I don't try and dig up from any. So this is semester two, academic year 2022. So if you look at the past exam papers, the format is pretty much like this. There are usually four questions. So let's take a look at question number one. This is the kind of question I've set. And as I said just now, all these questions are original in the sense that I don't dig up from anywhere, but of course the theoretical basis and all of this, perhaps, you can find it in literature.

So let's take a look at this interesting scenario. So suppose, suppose at birth. Every human being is given a fixed number of heartbeats. And once these heartbeats are used up, life ends. This is a scenario. Imagine that when we were born, all of us have a fixed number of heartbeats. Of course, over the number of years, 70 years, 80 years, the number of heartbeats will be a very huge number. Every minute, our heartbeats, 70 times, 80 times, 100 times, depending on the state of our physical being. How should one optimally use these heartbeats to have as long a life as possible? So you have a fixed number of heartbeats. So of course, you want to use it optimally. So that you live longer. This is quite natural, isn't it? So it is tempting to suggest that one is better off staying in bed and resting to maintain a low heartbeat. Then if that's the case, you want, it make sense to have a low heartbeat. You just say, hey, sit down, relax. Don't do anything. But it is all known to us. The signs of good health does point to the fact that a trained heart beats more slowly when the person is at rest. On this note, consistent exercising is not a bad idea. So although logic, based on the fact that we have a fixed number of heartbeats, so it's best that you don't do anything to maintain a low heartbeat. But you know, exercising is important. So exercising, but the problem with exercising is that you increase your heartbeat tremendously. So which on the surface, you tend to go against the logic, based on the fixed number of heartbeats.

Okay, let's look at some assumption. Suppose that the untrained heart beats 80 times per minute when a person is at rest. And during exercise, it beats 120 times per minute. So let's make this assumption. If you are the type that don't exercise much, and then you don't do anything, call it untrained heart. So it beats 80 times per minute. And exercise, during exercise, 120 times per minute. So if a person exercises the fraction x of his time, the average heartbeats per minute is defined with this equation f(x) equal to 120x plus one minus x, g(x). So x is a fraction of time, exercise, the fraction of the exercise time. So the average heartbeat is defined by this equation. And then subsequently to determine the appropriate function g(x). What's this g(x) here? g(x) can be formulated based on some logic as what is given. We can base it on the requirement that g(x) should be close to 80 for small x. Meaning you don't exercise. If you don't exercise, it should be 80. Which means that hardly any exercise is done. When x approaches one, we assume g to be closing in on 50. Meaning the person is well conditioned. Let's assume a simple model for g(x) to be as such as given here.

So here's the thing. So when you exercise a lot, when you exercise a lot, meaning x approaches one. So when x approaches one, one minus x times 100 is going to be almost close to zero. So therefore, your g(x) is about 50. So that's called a well conditioned heart. If you are super well conditioned, it may go down to 50. So 50 means that you have longer. Because you are a fixed number of heartbeats. So if it's lower, of course, you live longer. So of course, ultimately, what do you want, also based on this condition. So there are two situation. One when you exercise, you increase your heartbeat per minute. But on the other hand, when you don't exercise, your heartbeat is lower. What's that sweet spot that you want to attain, such that you optimize your lifespan. So that's the question.

Now, this is a kind of question where I think when you read the number of words and descriptions and all, it can get a little bit daunting or intimidating. But actually, to work out the problem is not that difficult. So you're asked to produce a table according to the format shown in table one in your answer script. So this is table one. Produce this table of value here. Part one, fill in g(x), x, g(x), and f(x) in the table. You are free to select 20 suitable values of x to work out an approximate solution optimum value for exercising, state the optimum time for exercising in minutes per day. Is it clear what the question is asking for? It's just simple calculations. So what you do is just plug in some values. 20 values, 0.01, 0.02, and so on. Do you understand? So let's say, so let's say you plug in this value. So you do some quick calculations just to get a feel. How do you get g(x) from the equation? So there are 20 values. So this x, you can choose any value. So you do a couple then, before I showed you. So the question says fill in the values for x, g(x), and f(x) in the table, you're free to select 20 suitable values of x. So I've shown you a set of values, but in essence, you can choose any values that you want. Just for the 20 values and so on. And then based on the values, work out an approximate optimum value, approximate optimum value for exercising.

And so my set of values, this is a set of values that I have. So this is a set of values. Now, take a look at the value. What would be a good value for x? What would be a good proportion of x? Based on the table. Assuming these are the values that I chose. 0.02? Do you know how to interpret the value? What's the objective? We want, fixed number of heartbeats. So to maximize, to increase your lifespan, you want your heartbeat to be small. So looking at this table here, what would be the good value for x based on these 20 values. Do you understand? So the calculation is very simple. But it's making sense of all these numbers here, that may require a little bit of thinking. So in order to make sense out of this number, you got to understand the scenario here. What you're trying to do is to choose x such that the number of heartbeats is lower. So if you look at all these values here. So 0.01, if you take 0.01 fraction, or 1% of the time in exercising, your resting heartbeat is about 61.6. So if you do like 2% of the time in exercising, then it is 55, so and so on. So if you go from this table, from the selected values, 0.04, 53.327, that seems to be the lowest. So from this limited set of values that you choose, you say that seems like I just need to exercise about 4% of the time. So meaning to say your whole life, right, you spent about 4% of the time in exercising.

Now, we probably can't relate to that much. In the question, it says, how many minutes per day? How many, 0.04? So 4% of 24 hours, 4% of 24 hours. About one hour, right? At the 55 to 60 minutes. So that's what according to the model. So you spend about maybe every day, maybe 55 minutes or so, to exercise. Now, these are just, this is just approximate value. Ideally, if you're clear about what optimization means. You can even go further, and I think you can bring it down to like 0.036 or 37. So the idea of putting in these values by hand, is just to get an idea to know where the optimum is. And then after that through a little bit of a fine adjustment, you can actually get a value of 0.037. So 0.037 is about like 53, 54 minutes, and so on. So there's a time that you should exercise. So that is what it means. And look at the question again. State the optimum time for exercising in minutes per day. So about 55 minutes per day.

Write suitable fitness function f*(x) to scale the fitness value so that they are normalized 0 to 1. Fill in the values under the column f*(x) accordingly. You're going to write a fitness function or fitness value. So how do you write it? Let's go to the table. So this is a table of value. What would be a suitable fitness function? I think it is safe to conclude that the values won't be zero. The heartbeats won't be zero because then it means like the person, there's no life. So there's a range of value, in particular those below 50. So values less than 50 won't exist. And also the higher values, right up to a certain range. So it is kind of give you an indication that your fitness is only applicable on a certain range of values. So based on that notion, when you write the fitness, something like this, all these values. So when I mark this, I don't look for particularly 50 or 70, as long as it is something along that line. 50 minus 50, if you put, that's fine.

So suitable function for normalized fitness. So that's part two of the question. Then the next question is, is this difficult problem? Is it difficult? From an optimization point of view? Not difficult. You can even solve by hand, but, of course, you can always configure GA to solve this. It's a single variable, kind of a complex landscape, so it's therefore not a difficult optimization problem. Can be solved in polynomial time. No issue. The description may be very elaborate, but actually, the solving part, working out a solution is not difficult. So this is the first part of the question.

So let's take a look at the next part of the question. We just look at question one. Now we are done with Part A, Part A has three parts. So we answered all three parts. Then Part B, totally separate, based on the categorization of the type of problems according to generic input block architecture. Which type of problem would you categorize the following? Provide explanation for the choice of your categorization. Prediction of IBM share price based on historical valuation for trading purpose. What kind of problem? Optimization. So which one would you categorize? So there can be more than one answer. What is important is your justification or your explanation.

Prediction of share price. So who says optimization? Anybody? Who says simulation? It's possible. So you need to explain why you see it as a simulation. Who says modeling? Modeling. So you model. So of course, quite likely it's going to be a modeling problem because you have this historical data. So you want to find a model, such that you can approximate the trend based on historical data. So I will kind of lean myself more towards a modeling. Well, of course, if you say a simulation, perhaps you can explain a little bit more, why you see it as a simulation problem. So this one is modeling. Time series data with corresponding valuation of share or past trading are already known. So it's based on historical data. So we can use it to fit into a model where the error of prediction is minimized. So we're trying to find a model that approximate the valuation based on the historical trend.

Now, what about packing of odd size boxes into a truck for delivery? You have a truck. You know what the truck is, the container truck. So fixed shape, rectangular space. So you're trying to fit boxes. So if the boxes are different size, then of course, you've got to find, if you don't pack it properly, there will be a lot of empty space. So usually, we call it like a kind of bin packing problem, trying to pack the boxes into a box. So do you see it as optimization? Modeling, simulation. I think this one, most of you should be able to catch on and say, very likely to be optimization problem. So we are searching for the input, the input meaning the packing order of all the boxes to go into net.

What about the next one? Policy making for country's economic planning unit. So country needs to do strategic planning, on the economic front. They need to make policies, maybe to stimulate growth, harmony, and so on. So you see, what kind of problem do you see this as? Optimization? Modeling, simulation, simulation. Okay. I think it is most appropriate as a simulation problem. So usually you assume a model, meaning like a certain policy and so on that is being implemented. And then inputs are applied to the model and outputs derived are observed and evaluated. So that is very likely to be a simulation model.

Something that we have done in lecture, rostering security guards. You want to do rostering. So in an apartment complex. So many apartment complex, they have security guards. So they have a fixed number of personnel. So you need to do rostering. What could be, if you were to, from a problem solving point of view. Do you see this as optimization? Possible. Or like me, quite common. Because you're trying to find an optimized roster or schedule. But there are also a situation where you may also pose it as a simulation. So you want to simulate, maybe you want to look beyond. Let's say based on certain dynamic conditions. During different time, different areas, the flow of human traffic is different at different time. So usually, you can see that in a simulation kind of problem, they tend to be the so called dynamic situation. Like just like in traffic management. It's a dynamic situation. So a lot of this dynamic problem can fit into the simulation kind of scenario. So you got to explain, depending on what you choose. So this is an example of one complete question for you.

Let's take a look at one more. And the next problem, I think you can relate to a lot more. Something that we do quite a lot. That's the Queens. So I will look at Semester two, 2024. Let me enlarge this. So question consists of two independent parts. We just take a look at the first part because this is kind of problem we deal with quite a bit in all the lectures like we have done. So Q equal to Q1 and Qn, by now you are familiar with this notation here. It's the permutation string coding for a GA, where the value Qi denotes the column position of the queen, quite similar to what we have done. So the problem as described here, in fact, is exactly the one that we use also in our example. Illustrative example.

So here, it is presented as a pseudocode. If you are not comfortable with pseudocode, even if you are not comfortable with pseudocode, I think it is not difficult to see what this code is trying to describe. So the pseudocode for computing the number of conflicts among the n number of queens is as given below. So this procedure here is to count the conflicts. So initially count is zero. Then this for loop, and then they are nested for loops. For i equal to one to n minus one, and then for j equal to i plus one to n. d1 is equal to Qi minus Qj, absolute value, and d2 is j minus i. If d1 equal to d2, meaning Qi minus Qj equal to j minus i, then it means that there's a conflict, so you increment the count. C represents a conflict.

Now, here's a question, not difficult. After the examples that we've gone a few, a couple of times. Write an equation for the number of diagonal conflict C(Q). Based on your equation, calculate C(Q) for this configuration. And what's the equation? So I heard some of you say, oh, you're not so comfortable with all the mathematical symbols and so on. I cannot say that you don't have to know how to write some of these symbols, mathematical symbols and so on. So it is necessary to have certain level of confidence in understanding some of these mathematical symbols, equations. So this equation here is what I've shown you earlier on in my paper example. So if you go to, can you see the equation? C(Q), double summation. The two nested loops. So the first, i equal to one to n minus one. This is a big symbol. This one. Let me use a laser point. The first for loop, this is a Sigma symbol. And then the inner loop, the smaller Sigma, j equal to i plus one to n. And here I use d here. d equal to one if this condition is true, Qi minus Qj, absolute, equal to j minus i. Otherwise, zero. This equation is quite clear. Very similar. We've seen it before.

Then the question says to, asking about the configuration given. So given this configuration of queen, you can work out from the equation that the number of conflicts equal to three. So you can work out, for example, like queen number one, two, six, six minus two is four. Gene number one and one, two, three, four, five, gene number one and gene number five. So one and five. So there's i minus j or j minus i. So there's five. And then two, one, two, three, four, five, four. Gene number one and number five. So five minus one is four. And then the allele is two and six. That's Qi minus Qj, absolute. So two and six, six minus two is four. So four equal to four, that's i minus j, which is also equal to four. So there's a conflict, and so on. So you can quickly check through the value. Now, of course, if you want, you can also draw it out. You can draw it out. I think many of you would draw it out. And then you can see for yourself that there are three conflicts. The conflicts. And so this is one, this is two, and then this is three conflicts.

Now, here's a little bit of a challenge here. The next part is a little bit of a challenge. So there's a high chance you will give me a solution where, one minus C(Q) divided by, is it 28, 28? Eight times seven over two is 28. So many of you, I think, will write one minus C(Q) divided by 28, correct? What if n equal to 15? Because the question is the n queen problem. Of course, the example is, example is an eight queen. But yet if you were to be asked to write a general form of the fitness. So this is how we should do it. So you have one minus, because the C(n,2) is actually n times n minus 1 over 2. C(n,2). It's two out of n, C(n,2) is n times n minus 1 over 2. Therefore, your fitness values will be such. So there's a more general one. Many of you give answers like divided by 28 is acceptable, but that is not the ultimate one. And it's similar to the n queens we have talked about.

Let's go to look at the remaining part. Let me refresh. Write a suitable, so the second question is the second part. You are required to optimize n dimensional function using a real value coded GA. For n equal to five, the chromosome x is represented as x1, x2, x3, x4, x5. Function to optimize is as follow. Assuming this is a function optimization that you are trying to solve. The function that you're trying to solve is as given here. I think that's big enough. You're trying to solve this x. This x is a vector, x represent the five variables, x1, x2 all the way to x5. In a way, you can look at it as a five dimension of problem. But of course the function itself is simple or simplified, just to manage the complexity.

Now, of course, function optimization, we're going to use the real value coded, perform arithmetic crossover operation on the two chromosomes. A equal to this, 0.8, 0.6, 0.3, 0.7, 0.2 and B equal to 0.5, 0.4, 0.9, 0.1, and then one. Using a flexible Alpha approach. Flexible Alpha approach. Meaning Alpha can varies. Here's a scheme for how to adapt the Alpha. In the flexible Alpha approach, Alpha is equal to fitness, the f, the value of the function based on A minus f of B, the absolute the difference, divided by f of A plus f of B. That's how you're going to adjust the Alpha. So you're asked to determine the value of f of A, f of B, f of A prime, f of B prime, where A prime and B prime are the offspring of the crossover. Very simple. Based on this rule here, you can calculate f of A, you can calculate f of B. When you have f of A and f of B, you can determine the Alpha according to this equation. And then once you have Alpha, you can write out the offspring, f of A prime and then f of B prime, where A prime and B prime are the offspring after the crossover. So you can work out a table and then to calculate these values here.

And after that, the next part asks you to present your views, whether this is good or this is no good. So you have two ways of, is this good? Is this no good? So you believe it is good, then you would provide justification for such a cross over method. If you think it's no good, then you provide justification for why is no good. That is what the last part. And I think the last part may present a little bit a small challenge, right, to some.

So back to the flexible Alpha approach. So I did some calculations on Excel, and this is what we get. So f of A is 0.98, f of B is 0.67 based on the equation. 0.98. So this is f of A, based on this set of values given, 0.8, 0.6, just a minute. So f of A 0.98, f of B 0.67. So this is calculated from Excel, 0.8, 0.6, 0.3, 0.7, 0.2, right? So you get f(x) is 0.98. And the other set of values, you get 0.67. So then you apply the flexible Alpha. So Alpha, once you know f of A, you know f of B, then you know the Alpha value, then the offspring that is generated. This is the offspring generated. So the offspring that you get has a fitness of 0.955, and then 0.11, 0.5. So the calculation part is as per the instructions given. So the question gives you instructions on how to calculate. So most people should get that. Most people did get that.

Now, you see that this approach involves a flexible alpha approach. So quite, Alpha will believe that anything that's flexible tends to be good. Which is not completely untrue. So it's possible that it's good. So depending on what you see or what you think, do you think it's good? Is it bad? Think about it. So quite a creative way to adjust the Alpha based on the fitness. Is it good? Not good. So if you say no good, no good. What could be a reason that would lead you to think that this is no good, or what could be an argument? I think quite clear is that, assuming you don't know the landscape. When you don't know something, at the end of it, you don't have a clear understanding of what the solution landscape is. So whatever you do, you cannot say for sure it's going to affect it in some positive way or negative way. So based on that assumption, Alpha, the clear correlation between Alpha and the landscape, that's not clear. But in this approach here, you would have some additional calculations that are required to determine Alpha. The problem is small, is five dimensions, but what if it is a problem of huge dimension? So if you argue against it, so justification on why this may not be a good approach, or may not be necessary. Computation involved in calculating Alpha value can be significant. Just added computation. So if you compare it to standard arithmetic crossover operation, the flexible Alpha, the additional computational cost increases manifold. Because the conventional one, the Alpha is just a standard value or constant. So it's also unlikely that the cost of the additional computational resources warrants the improvement, if any. Because we don't really know. We don't know. Because we don't know what the landscape is. And I mean, from earlier work, based on what is reported in literature, Alpha equal to 0.5 seems to work generally well. For very high dimensional problems, this additional computational cost is even more serious. So you would argue against it because the fact is that we don't really know the landscape. We cannot say for sure whether when you add all these calculations based on fitness here, it's going to improve the performance.

What if you argue for it? If you try to justify for such an approach. So both answers are acceptable. It all depends on how you present it. Well, same thing could be said, we don't really know what the end result we want. So we could also say that, since we don't know, so to have that Alpha that adjust accordingly to the fitness, may also enhance the performance. So if you were to kind of put in a justification, so if you believe that that alpha value is sensitive enough to affect the performance of the algorithm. Maybe you have some a priori knowledge and so on. So then it may be worth the effort. So it's worth the effort to calculate the added computation. So using a flexible alpha approach, each crossover results in two offspring, fewer crossover to replenish the whole population. So it is believable that the nature and characteristics of some problems may benefit from such a solution scheme. So again, there are two sides to it, you can go argue for it or you can argue against it. So I've seen in the answers, both spectrum were presented, and they are marked according to the views that are presented. For example, if you say you're against it or you think it's not good because nobody use it. That's not a good justification. Or the book, that will say you can use it. So that's how I marked this.

So I hope this examples will give you an idea, a flavor of the kind of exam questions. And of course, I think, in whatever exam, you just do your best answer. Write whatever you can. If you don't write anything, no credit can be given. So I think you should be manageable, if you've been following what we are doing. So later on today, I will see you in quiz. Try and be punctual. If you are late, beyond a certain time, I think probably I won't give you the quiz paper. So 9:30, and you already know where you'll be seated. So I'll see you this evening. Is that okay? So we have a shortened class. So if you have any questions after this. You're welcome to approach me, and I'll do my best to clarify. See you tonight.
