Okay,  good  morning.  It  is. So  let  us  start  our  for  today. Okay. So  last  week, We  talk  about  general  problem  solving. Basically,  that's  about  it. So  I  think  it  is  useful  to understand  what  we  are trying  to  do  to  begin  with, before  we  actually  talk about  the  technique  on  its  own,  right? So  we  talk  about  why  we  want  to  that  becomes the  so  called  the  primary  motivation why  we  study  technique. So  I  just  want  to  do  a  quick  recap of  what  we  did  the  last  week. So  you  in  this  course, one  part  of  it  is  GA  genetic  algorithm. So  it's  basically a  problem  solving  technique. We  are  essentially  trying  to  solve  problem. B  it  we  design  algorithm  or  we  do coding  and  all  we  are  solving  problem. Now,  what  is  this  technique? Well,  this  technique  is about  a  inspired  technique. So  the  motivation, the  technique  itself,  the  approach, you  know  is  based  on  the  metaphor  of  nature. Specifically,  we  are  talking about  natural  evolution,  right? So  like  the  principle  of  survival  of the  fitters  and  then  the  genetics  and  so  on. So  we'll  see  later  on,  right? So  just  to  touch  up on  the  background  behind  all  this. And  we  say  because  we  are  solving  problems, it  is  useful  to  be  able  to  understand  or classify  the  nature  of the  problems  that  we  are  tackling. On  that  note,  we  look  at  four  tracks  on  how we  actually  classify  or describe  problems  if  you  may, like  the  black  box,  search  space, optimization,  constraint  satisfaction, and  then  NP  hardness. I  want  you  to  have  a  very  general  ID  on these  four  tracks  on  how we  classify  and  describe  problems. In  a  black  box,  I  call  it  IM  O,  you  know, I  stans  or  input, stans  or  model,  and  then  stans  or  output. Now  there  are  basically three  components  we  are  talking  about. Input  model  and  output. So  the  basis  of  this  classification  as black  box  is  whenever  one  of  it  is  missing, that  would  give  it  specific  nature or  type  of  problem. For  example,  input  is  missing, what  kind  of  problem  you're  looking  at. You're  looking  at  optimization. Right?  If  the  m  is  missing, you're  looking  at  a  modeling  type  of  problem. You're  trying  to  find  a  model,  right? If  the  output  is  missing, You  are  doing  simulation. And  you  can  look  around  you, many  of  the  problems  that  you  encounter. Generally,  it  can  belong  to  one  of  these  t. So  have  a  good  grasp on  how  to  distinguish  this  t. Now  because  it's  machine  learning, we  always  say  neural  networks  and  so  on. Neural  network  is  a  kind  of modeling.  If  you  think  about  it. So  you're  trying  to  build  a  model. But  the  only  thing  is  that the  model  itself  is  not comprehensible  to  you  because these  are  all  weights,  you  know,  numbers. But  all  you  know  is  that  the  neural  network, when  you  actually  train it  if  it  has  learned,  right? That  models  that  model  works  in  terms of  associating  the  correct  output to  the  inputs. And  as  a  search  problem. So  when  you're  doing  a  search, when  you're  searching  for  something, you'll  be  thinking  about  the  size,  right, the  dimension  or  the  kind of  solves  that  you  want  to  use. Okay?  So  it's  good  to  understand  at  times, it  is  good  to  look  at  from  the  perspective  of the  landscape  you're  trying  to  s.  Now, you  know,  in  many  continuous  problem if  they  are  miel, right,  as  compared  to  convex  kind  of  problem. If  it's  a  convex  kind  of  problem, a  basic  or  simple  hill  climbing  technique would  actually  do  the  job. And  constraint. Optimization  versus  constraint  satisfaction. So  you  can  distinguish between  optimization,  right? If  usually  there's  an objective  or  cost  function associated  to  the  problem. Having  said  that  many problems  involve  constraints. Good  example  is  a  time  tableing,  right? It  is  easy,  or it's  not  difficult  to  find  a  timetable that  possibly  satisfy  your so  called  your  constraints in  terms  of  resources,  and  so  on. Resources  like  your  manpower, your  physical  venues. But  real  life  problems usually  involve  constraints. There  are  two  types  of  constraints  we  say. One  is  a  hard considering  the  soft  constraints. Hard  consider  or  consideras that  must  be  satisfied. If  it's  not  satisfied, then  that  constitute a  feasible  or  val  solution or  impractical  solution. Now,  soft  constraints  are  constraints  where you  satisfy  as  and  when  possible. Most  problems  are  of  that  type,  you  know, that  optimization  involving  constraints. Another  track  that  we  cover  is on  the  pes  of  the  problem. When  you  talk  about  Pines, NP  basically  refers to  nondeterministic  polynomial. So  essentially,  you  want  to understand  the  difficultnes  of  the  problem. If  you  know  our  problem  is  MP  art, assuming  you  know  a  problem is  NP  art,  what  do  you  do? You  come  up  with  a  precise algorithm  to  solve  it? No  way,  right?  Because  it's NP  hard,  you  know,  right? So  that's  why  we  study  genetic  algorithm. We  use  a  approximate  approach. Like  a  genetic  algorithm.  You  know  saying? I  mean,  just  like  the  example, I  gave  you  a  scenario  of the  person  tasked  to  solve  a  problem. He  walks  to  the  boss,  you  know, he  say,  Oh,  this  problem  is  not  solvable. Well,  you  fire  me, even  you  cannot  find  anybody. But  doesn't  mean  that  is  the  end of  the  world,  nowadays, we  have  so  many  powerful  techniques, like  genetic  algorithm,  colony, B  optimization,  and  so  on. These  are  what  we  call approximate  techniques. Now,  I'm  also  going  to  throw  you  one  more what  we  call  the  matter  heuristics. Matter  heuristics. Heuristics,  you  all  know. Heuristics,  you  know,  the  rule  of  thumb. For  example,  the  rule  of  um says  that  normally if  I  take  the  other  way,  it  is  shorter. So  it  means  that's  just  a  rule  of  time. I  I  follow  that  way,  it  will  be  the  shortest, but  it  doesn't  guarantee. That's  heuristics. But  method  heuristics  is  interesting. Method  heuristics  includes  like genetic  algorithm,  your  simulator  el, your  end  colony  optimization, your  wheel  optimization, all  those  nature  inspired  this so  called  approximate  algorithm. When  do  we  rely  on  approximate  algorithm? When  the  problem  is  NP  hard, the  NP  kind  of  problem  is  intractable. You  cannot  have  a  precise or  deterministic  or  it's  not effective  to  use a  precise  or  deterministic  approach to  solve  it. Therefore,  you  go  towards  approximate  method, for  example,  what  we  cited  genetic  algorithm. Very  elegant  way  of  dealing  with  problems. That's  pretty  much  what we  talk  about  the  last  time. We  have  a  good  footing  in  terms of  being  clear  about  what  we  want  to  do. Now,  I  will  carry  on  to continue  to  talk  about so  called  the  origin  or  the  background. There  are  two  tracks. You  say  is  a  meta  heuristic. It  is  based  on  the  metaphor  or  nature. In  particular,  what  we draw  upon,  there  are  two. One  is  a  natural  evolution, natural  evolution. To  be  clear  about  the  word  evolve, when  we  talk  about  eve, the  changing  of  day  to  day  things. It's  not  that.  We're  talking  about  evolution on  a  very  different  time  scale.  Right? Even  hundreds  of  years,  you  know,  Okay? Before  you  you  see  noticeable  changes. So  when  it  evolves, the  whole  species  or the  whole  population  will  evolve,  right? It's  not  an  individual that  change  day  to  day. That's  not  the  kind  of  evolution we  are  talking  about,  right? So  the  principles  to  we  draw on  survival  of  the  fittest,  right? So  very  quickly,  We understand  that  we  all live  in  a  world  where  resources  are  finite. And  as  I  always  say, if  they  are  more  than  enough, there's  no  problem  to  some. Be  more  an  enough. What's  the  deal  with. But  of  course,  the  reality is  that  everything  is  limited. And  keep  in  mind,  limited  resources. Life  forms,  let  me  use  pointer. Life  forms  a  basic  instinct. Life  cycles  geared  towards  reproduction. It  as  all  program  in  nature,  right? The  motivation,  the  driving  force,  right? It  is  towards  reproduction, survival  of  the  species,  Correct? That's  the  so  called  hart  ire  in  nature, you  know,  right  in  a  way. So  when  you're  faced  with  limited  resources, and  you  face  with  that  drive  towards so  called  reproduction,  right? So  what  must  happen? You  must  fight,  you  know. So  therefore,  you  must  compete. To  compete  means  that  there's  some  kind of  built  in  kind  of mechanism  that  does  selection. Who  can  go  forward,  who, you  know,  which  reproduce  and  so  on. Naturally,  your  instinct  will tell  you,  okay,  you  know. So  the  general  rule will  tell  you  that,  you  know, if  individuals can  compete  for  resources  effectively, right,  that  should  be  so called  criteria towards  increased  chance  of  reproduction. So  that's  how  the  whole metaphor  of  nature  and how  species  evolve  over  time. So  what  is  clear  is  that  we  are  talking  about fitness  driven  kind  of  reproduction. Yes,  sir. Fitness  driven. Okay.  So  it's  based  on  fitness. All  right.  So  those  are  fit. All  right,  the  indication of  the  reward  will  be, so  called  favored  for  reproduction. Now,  the  other  thing  that  is  in  nature is  you  want  a  variety, you  want  a  su  called  diversity,  right? Then  the  question  is  diversity  in  what? Or  the  traits. The  looks,  the  physical  manifestation, some  with  long  hair, some  with  short  hair, brown  hair,  some  with  no  hair. Different  all  this  diversity. That's  what  nature  wants. It's  all  part  of  the  so  called the  whole  scheme  of  nature. So  we  want  diversity. Is  that  what  we  call  the  phenotypic  traits? The  phenotype  is  expression of  the  individuals  and  how it  interacts  with  the  word. So  naturally,  what  this  means  is  that because  there's  a  so called  selection  that  play, the  kind  of  traits  that  are  favorable in  terms  of  so called  competing  for  resources  and  so  on, that  would  be  the  one  that  is  favored,  right? So  the  expression  In  essence, we  are  looking  at  so  called  two  levels. In  the  process  of  evolution, there  are  two  levels. One  we  talk  about  individuals. The  other  we  talk  about  population. So  when  we  talk  about  individuals. Individuals  express  phenotypic  traits, the  characteristics. But  individual  is  part  of a  group  what  we  call  population. So  when  we  talk about  the  individuals  exist within  the  so  called  population. So  when  we  talk  about  so  called  evolution. We're  talking  about  evolution as  a  population,  right? You  don't  say,  this individual  evolve,  you  know,  no. Be  clear  about  that. Of  course,  in  nature, the  evolution  is  on a  very  different  time  scale. We're  talking  about  say  hundreds  of  years or  thousands  of  years, for  evolution  take  place. But  when  we  solve  problems, our  type  scale  is  different. Right? A  time  scale  is  within  like milliseconds  for  each  generation and  so  on  because  we  simulate  that  so called  the  algorithm,  right? Be  is  my  nature,  right? Okay.  The  other  one  is  right? So  so  you know  You  know, the  in  living  things, you  know,  the  DNA,  right? That's  a  code,  you  know, that's  a  natural  code  that  is  within  us. That  is  what  distinguish. What  kind  of  how  we express  the  physical  aspects in  the  real  world. And  that  physical  aspects is  what  we  call  the  phenotype,  right? The  phenotypic  traits,  a? So  like  the  physical  expression  Okay. The  pheno  phenotypic  trait, one  of  the  traits  I  have  would  be  like, maybe  brown  eyes  and  so  on. So  that  is  a  phenotypic  trait.  Okay. So  that  DNA  inside  here,  right? That's  the  so  called  the  genotype. Okay.  So  that  strand, the  chromosome,  consists  of  genes,  you  know. So  that  will  determine  the  phenotype. So  the  genes,  based  on  the  genes, the  expression  in  terms  of  the  traits, you  know,  which  you call  the  phenotypic  traits. So  there's  that  mapping  here, genetic,  and  then  the  expression. And  So  and  I think  you've  read  many  times,  right. So  we  say,  a,  that  strand  there. So  the  gene  may  change.  Okay. So  any  small  changes doesn't  mean  a  small  change  in the  when  it  comes to  the  phenotypic  trait,  you  know, a  small  change  within the  gene  can  actually  cause show  as  a  very  big  significant  change in  the  phenotype. Okay. So  the  genes  are  encoded  in  strands  of  DNA, which  we  call  the  chromosomes. And  you  usually  have so  the  whole  genetic  materials is  what  we  call  the  genome. So  each  of  the  species, usually  between  the  so  called  the  chromosome, they  are  almost  the  same except  for  small  differences  and  so  on. That's  what  we  know  about  the  DNA. And So  how  does  it so  how  do  we  bring it  based  on  that  notions  of  DNA? How  do  we  bring  it  into our  genetic  algorithm? Well,  that  provides  us  with a  so  called  a  motivation  on  how we  can  actually  code  in  our  problem  space. If  we  can  code  the  solution similar  to  like  a  chromosome, and  then  we  let  the  chromosome  go  through so  called  operations  that cause  so  called  diversity. What  kind  of  operations? For  example,  mutations. O.  All  right. Mutation  basically  small  change. Small  change.  Usually  random. I  think  there's  mutation  going  on. But  mutation,  the  results  of  mutation, as  you  can  see  here,  it  can  be  good, it  can  be  bad,  or  neutral. But  what  we  want  to  say  is in  algorithm  because  it  is  a  small  change. In  our  genetic  algorithm, a  mutation  kind  of  operator, what  effect  does  it  give  us? Creates  that  kind  of  diversity. That's  number  one.  Also  because  it's  random, when  you  put  mutation  in  an  algorithm, it  causes  that  kind  of  disturbance. When  you  solve  an  optimization  brown, you  run  and  then  it  gets  stopped. When  it  get  stopped,  if  you  leave  it  there, you  carry  on,  you  just  remain  there. Usually  what  happens  is that  you  need  a  perturbation, you  know,  like,  for  example, a  mutation  type  of  operation. So  you  shake  it,  then  it jumps  out  of  that  local  optimum  and  so  on. You  can  corelate,  somehow within  what  happens  or  what  occurs in  nature  and  how  it  can  be  so  called transformed  or  map  into an  algorithm  to  solve  problems. Essentially  what  we  look  at  is  on  two  front. The  motivation,  if  somebody  asked  you,  ok, how  what's  the  motivation  or  what  inspired? What  about  nature, the  inspired  genetic  algorithm? Two  parts.  One  is  the  survival  fits, right?  The  natural  evolution. The  second  part,  genetics. Genetics  provides  with so  called  that  understanding  of how  based  on  understanding  of how  nature  how  life  form is  represented  in  terms  of  DNA. So  by  the  same  token  in  genetic  algorithm, based  on  the  problem  here, we  can  or  represent it  something  similar  to  a  chromosome. And  then  after  that, we  manipulate  that  chromosome. So  there's  a  whole  basis of  our  problem  solving. So  based  on  evolution, we  understand  the  survival  of the  fittest  kind  of  operation,  the  selection. So  that's  what  evolution  gave  us. So  when  selection  happens, right,  Instinct  will  tell  you  that,  you  know, as  you  do  more  and  more  selection,  with  time, or  with  iterations,  the  fitness  will  actually improve  with  time,  right? So  that's  quite  natural. So  you  kind  of  get  the  drift,  right? You  see  that  in  our  algorithm, just  like  in  nature, we  work  with  population. So  by  the  same  token, in  our  algorithm  also  we  have all  these  samples  in  the  population. So  as  with  each  iteration  or  in  nature, it's  called  generation.  All  right. So  in  our  algorithm  with  each  iteration, so  there  will  be operations  that  goes  carry  on. So  these  kind  of  operations right  is  to  cause that  kind  of  variation  that's  needed. Why  do  you  need  that  variation? You're  looking  for  new  solutions,  Correct? Right?  If  there's  no  variation, you  are  not  exploring,  you  know. So  because  there's  a  so  called  variation, you  create  that  kind  of  variation. So  you're  looking  for  new  things,  you  know. What  does  a  new  thing  represent potential  solution  to  your  problem? See,  the  whole  thing  is the  scheme  is  actually  so  elegant,  you  know, on  how  we  bring  what  we  see from  nature  into  problem  solving. All  right. And  let's  take  a  look  at  what is  genetic  algorithm  or  what  is the  evolution  evolutionary  algorithm. All  right. So  here  in,  we  start  our maybe  a  more  closer  understanding  of what  GA  or  EA  is  all  about. And  later  on,  I'll  throw  you examples  on  how  to how  to  formulate  kind of  evaluation  that  determines a  fitness  using  the  queens  as  an  example. As  far  as  EA  is concerned  or  genetic  algorithm  is  concerned. We'll  first  look  at  the general  scheme  of  an  EA, and  then  we  will  hopefully  derive a  better  understanding on  all  these  components here  which  are  part  of  the  GA, like  representation,  evolution,  population. And  then  selection. Selection,  there  are  two  types. One  is  a  selection. The  parents  selection. The  other  is  a  survival  selection. Parents  selection  is  very as  the  name  implies, right  to  select  for  reproduction  to generate  the  so  called the  new  generation  of  population. Survival  means  that  from one  generation  to  another  generation,  right? Usually  we  work  on a  stady  statement  of  our  GA. Usually  has  fixed  population. For  example,  you  start  out  with populations  of  100. Although  in  nature, the  population  may  go  up  and  down. But  when  we  stimulate in  our  genetic  algorithm, we  usually  maintain  a  constant  population. Because  we  maintain  a  constant  population, so  as  we  move  along. There's  the  so  called  requirement  to  decide, who  is  going  to survive  to  the  new  generation? Because  when  you  reproduce, you  generate  more. If  your  population  is  100, so  you  generate  more  than  100. Then  subsequently  to  go to  the  next  generation, you  need  to  decide  out  of  this  so called  the  original  individuals plus  the  reproduce, those  that  are  being  reproduced. The  offspring,  how  do you  decide  who  to  survive? That  is  called  a  survival  selection? Only  two  types  of  operations. One  is  more  of  a  recombination  type and  the  other  is  a  mutation  type. Recombination  is  more  like  reproduction. When  you  recombine,  usually  quite  typically, you  take  two  individuals. Because  remember,  these  are  so called  selected, so  they  are  generally  quite  good. When  you  recombine,  you  take  part  of  A, part  of  B,  and  produce  a  new  one. Because  they  are  already  selected. Hopefully,  the  offspring  will  learn  some of  the  good  or  beneficial  characteristics from  the  parents. Mutation,  as  I  say,  is more  of  a  random  nature. It  has  its  role  in  the  algorithm. It's  a  random  shape  to  explore. That's  all  the  GA  is  all  about. I  somebody  asks  you  what  is GA,  two  operations  only. The  original  GA  by  Holland, the  recombination  is  the  crossover, the  crossing  over,  you  call  it  the  crossover. And  then  of  course,  the  mutation. Here  you  see  how  simple  GA  is, only  two  types  of  operations. The  recombination  type  and then  the  mutation  type. All  right. Then  we  will  look at  the  eight  queens problem  in  a  little  bit  detail. I'll  work  on  an  example,  you  know, how  you  represent  and how  you  write  out  the  fitness  functions, you  know,  in  your  eight  queens. Then  the  last  three,  we  want  to  have a  very  general  understanding contextual  view  of what  optimization  is  all  about. Right?  It's  pretty  interesting, over  the  last  ten  or  15  years, you  know,  how  people  has seen  optimization  change. Our  perception  is  transformed. That  relationship between  the  so  called  problems, and  the  complexity,  k? All  right?  It's  a  simple  picture  of  a  GA. GA.  So  you  see, you  have  three  components,  three  entities, your  population,  your  parents and  your  offspring,  right? And  then  from  the  offspring  and  parents, you  decide  the  the  new  population. This  three  simple  block. Okay.  And  from these  three  simple  blocks  here, there's  a  process  of  so  called  to transform  from  one  block  to  another  block. So  from  the  population,  right, there's  a  selection  process to  decide  on  the  parents. Now,  of  course,  when  you  begin  the  algorithm, you  initialize  initialization  quite  often. Is  just  random  initialization. When  you  start  out  with  GA, you  just  randomly  initialize  it. I  later  on,  maybe  we explore  a  little  bit  of  other  issues like  Is  it  always  In  your  mind,  right? If  you  randomly  initialize, then  it's  just  very  poor quality  kind  of  starting  point. As  compared  to  let's  say  you initialize  with  reasonably  good  quality. Which  one  is  better? There's  a  chance  that logic  will  tell  you  that, if  I  start  off with  better  quality  individuals, then  that  should  work  better. But  you'll  be  surprised  to  know, that  may  not  be  the  case. You  know?  Because  when  you  initialize  it to  certain  supposedly  good  quality  solution, right? That  may  actually  hinder or  limit  the  space  that  you  are  searching. Imagine  you  start  on  in  something  good. So  essentially,  you  are constraining  yourself  to  this  part,  right? But  yeah,  the  solution may  be  somewhere  else,  you  know. So  they  are  so  called  pros  and  cons  system. So  you  initialize  the  population, and  then  you  do  a  selection. In  order  to  do  a  selection,  what  must  happen? You  must  have  a  way  to know  who  is  good,  who  is  bad. You  must  have  some  kind  of  figure  of merit  to  gauge  who  is  good,  who  is  back. Then  based  on  that,  you  select  the  parents. The  tendency  is  the  parent  pool  here. Generally  will  be  the  better  ones. O  of  the  population, there  will  be  the  better  ones. Then  from  the  parents,  you  prove  some  kind  of so  called  stochastic  kind  of operations  like  recombination  or  mutation. One  common  or  very common  recombination  is  your  cross  over. From  your  parents,  you produce  your  offspring. From  this  offspring  here, we  go  to  a  new  generation,  a  new  population. How  do  this  side? Well,  there  are  different  schemes. The  offspring  may  totally  replace. But  what  is  quite  common is  the  survivor  selection  would select  based  on the  offspring  plus  the  parents. If  we  select  if  it chooses  only  from  the  offspring, then  these  are  totally  unrelated. The  new  population  will  have  no  grandparents, But  if  the  selection  is  based on  offspring  plus  parents, then  essentially  the  new population  will  consist of  O  sing  plus the  grandparents  or  even  grad  grandparents. So  that  kind  of  scenario. You  put  it. Of  course,  there's  a  termination  part. So  each  round  is one  generation  or  one  iteration. So  you  keep  on  doing  it  until like  10,000  or  100,000, how  many  generations  in  maybe, you  know,  then  how do  you  decide  when  to  quit? That's  a  termination. What's  a  good  condition  or  criteria to  quit  when  you  found  a  solution. Solution  found  good  enough. Right? What's  another  good  criteria? When  it  converges. Convergence  means  that,  you  know, it  just  reach  a  stady  state. It  doesn't  improve  anymore. And  that's  also  another  good  condition. All  right. Another  good  criterion  for  termination? Time,  right? I  want  a  solution  within  2  seconds,  right? So  you  keep  running  2  seconds.  Time's  up. Then  whatever  the  best  solution, that  becomes  the  solution  that I  accept  or  deploy. Different  termination  condition. You  can  put  all  this  into  algorithm. It  becomes  a  loop  that  just  keeps  going. You  initialize  and  then  you evaluate  Evaluate  is  for the  basis  of  selection. Then  this  loop  here,  you  just keep  on  repeating. So  that's  how  easy  a  genetic  algorithm  is. Okay.  So  what  you've seen  is  that  in  a  GA, there's  a  populations  of  individuals. All  right.  Each  individual have  a  fitness  value. And  For  the  population. We  want  variation  to create  that  kind  of  diversity. Diversity  is  necessary  because  it  is the  similar  or  akin  to  so  called  exploring. The  more  diversity  it  is, the  more  you  are  exploring  the  possibility. Always  keep  in  mind,  this  is a  so  called  complex  such  space. If  it's  a  simple  problem, there's  no  need  for  GA. Assuming  we  are  talking  about  in  particular, the  MP  kind  of  problem.  So  this  is  complex. And  also  we  we should  accept  the  fact  that  in  order  to  solve it  using any  enumerative  way.  It's  not  practical. So  we  use  a  approximate  algorithm, for  example,  your  genetic  algorithm. Okay.  And  we  also  have  the so  called  the  selection, selection  based  on  survival  of the  fitus  and  mating  of  the  fitus. Okay.  So  The  whole  scheme,  you  can  see  it. You  can  see  it  as  a  new  dais a  new  form  of  dbnism, a  new  form  of  dabanism. In  our  natural  evolutionary  process, it  evolved  towards  higher  life  forms. In  nature,  that's  what  evolution  does. The  species  survive  and  then becomes  what  we  say  higher  life  form. Higher  life  form  means  the  better  ability to  deal  with  the  environment. That's  natural.  But  in our  optimization  context, we  call  it  the  new  dbinism. The  new  dabinism. Optimization  according to  some  fitness  criterion. Subsequently,  when  you  put  in  your  algorithm. How  is  the  algorithm driven  is  based  on  fitness? That  is  telling  you that  eventually  in  your  algorithm, you  must  derive  some  kind  of  fitness  measure. How  we  derive  the  fitness  measure, I'll  use  the  example  of  Qs, or  queens  to  illustrate  hopefully  in sufficient  details  to  give you  an  idea  or  a  feel. Optimization,  there  are  forces  at  work. There  are  two  forces  at  work. So  these  two  forces, they  have  different  orientation. One  of  the  force  increase  diversity. So  it  creates  many different  copies,  you  know,  right? They  are  different. So  there's  one  of  the  force,  one  or  force. The  other  force  pushes the  population  towards  similar? Because  you  select.  And  when  you  select, you  select  the  good  ones. So  as  you  move  along, when  you  do  a  selection, you  are  very  biased, You  biased  in  selecting  the  good  ones. You  you force the  diversity  because  you  are  selecting. On  the  one  hand,  you  are causing  diversity  to  increase  diversity. On  the  other  hand,  you  are  so call  reducing  or  shrinking  the  diversity. Then  you  say,  Okay,  oops, you  know,  what  to  do? We  want  diversity,  but we  also  want  to  find  a  solution. How  do  we  deal  with  this  two  opposing  forces? That's  the  whole  beauty  of  GA. The  whole  trick  or  the  whole  so called  approach  of  GA  is  to manage  this  such  that it  solves  the  problem  in  a  efficient  manner. So  if  somebody  say, you  know,  I  don't  know why  my  algorithm  just  doesn't  work. It  doesn't  perform  as  well  as  it  be. Of  course,  if  you  want  to  give a  high  level  answer,  you  say, you  need  to  manage  the  diversity  properly, which  is  true,  which  is  not  wrong. The  fact  that  the  algorithm is  not  working  the  way  it  should  be, it  means  that  the  so  called  the  forces  are not  balanced  in  a  effective  way. There's  a  whole  so  called ideology  about  genetic  algorithm. Okay.  When  you  solve  a  problem,  right? Let's  go  let's  begin to  dll  into  a  little  bit  more  specifics. Usually,  you  have  a  problem  to  solve. That  problem  is  like  the  scenario I  give  you,  you  know,  right? The  person  asked  to  solve  the  bender  snatch. So  your  boss  tells  you,  this is  a  problem  I  want  you  to  solve. All  right.  I  gives  you  the  description, you  know,  requirements  and  so  on. For  example,  if  it  is  a  TSP  problem, I  have  50  clients. I  need  to  service  every  day. They  give  an  order. Now,  I  want  you  to  come  up  with  an  algorithm, right  so  that  I  can  schedule my  delivery  man  to service  each  of  the  client. Then  on  top  of  that, some  of  the  clients  are  special, I  don't  want  to  lose those  clients,  you  know,  right? Because  they  are  my  big  customer, long  time  customer. There  are  you  introducing  constraints. These  are  the  kind  of  situation that  chances  are  you may  may  be  quite typical  when  you  talk about  solving  a  problem, because  you're  the  one going  to  do  the  coding. You  are  the  problems of  what  do  you  need  to  do? Of  course,  first  thing  you  must do  is  understand  the  problem. Once  you  understand  the  problem, and  you're  going  to  use  GA  to  solve  it. What's  the  next  step?  You  got  to  think about  how  to  represent solution  for  this  problem  here. We  are  talking  about  representation. Representation  means  to  a  solution, such  that  you  can  solve in  your  genetic  outgorith. That  coating  is  like  your  chromosome. In  your  genetics  as  your  chromosome, just  like  DNA  is  a  coating, the  chromosome  is  a  coating of  the  living  thing. In  GA,  the  coating  is  a  problem, the  solution  to  the  problem. That's  the  first  thing you  need  to  think  about. Right?  That's  like  represent so  called  the  problem. So  when  you  think about  so  called  this  representation  here, Essentially,  you  are  thinking about  how  to  represent,  right? You're  thinking  about  the  mapping. You're  mapping  the  phenotype  space to  the  genotype  space. Your  phenotype  space,  your  phenotype, the  expression,  the  real  world. And  then  you  map  it  into  your  genotype. That's  your  chromosome.  Right.  And  in  GA, our  representation  is  basically  strings, strings  of  numbers,  strings of  characters,  and  so  on. So  that  which  is  like  chromosome? So  to  put  it  very  simply, represent  the  real  world  and  the  genotype, which  is  a  chromosome. That's  a  representation. That's  the  first  thing.  We  think  about. For  example, in  the  traveling  salesman  problem, you  want  to  visit  ten  cities. The  ten  cities,  we  call  it  City  number  one, two,  three,  four,  five,  678910. How  do  you  represent  it? Very  naturally,  you  say string  of  ten  numbers.  That's  a  proposal. The  arrangement  of  the  ten  numbers will  tell  you  the  sequence of  how  you  want  to  go. You  get  a  picture, ok?  That's  a  representation. You  have  mapping  from the  genotype  to  the  phenotype. This  is  not  necessarily  one  to  one. By  the  same  token, you  also  need  to  reverse  Reverse. Once  you  solve  the  problem, you  must  be  able  to  manifest  or  express it  in  the  real  world  what  it  means. Like  your  traveling  salesman  problem. This  is  a  sequence  of  number. How  do  you  interpret  this  sequence  of number  into  the  sequence  in  terms of  how  the  salesman should  service  the  clients, for  example,  right? There  are  two  so called  two  mappings  you  are  talking  about. The  encoding,  meaning the  rail  vo  to  genotype, and  then  the  decoding, meaning  the  genotype  to  the  phenotype. The  first  one,  the  encoding, there  are  many,  many  different  ways. Many  ways  to  do  a  mapping,  not  just  one  way. O  to  put  it  another  way, two  person  designing  an  algorithm  for the  same  problem may  use  different  representation. But  the  decoding  is  one  to  one. I  give  a  solution  chromosome. The  way  you  decode, the  way  when  you  manifest it  into  the  real  solution, it  must  be  one  to  one,  right? Okay. What  we  have  known  so  far, quite  clearly  were  saying our  representation  is  what we  call  similar  to  chromosomes. Chromosomes  are  usually  strings of  characters  or  numbers  and  so  on. Chromosomes  contain  genes. Just  like  in  genetics. There  are  genes  that  make up  the  chromosomes,  many  genes. Which  are  in  positions called  the  low  side,  right? Or  in  singular  is  called  locus. Okay.  So  the  position  itself. So  if  I  give  you  the  string, the  position  that's  a  locus. Okay.  So  those  are  the  genes,  right? For  number  G  number  one,  G  number  two  or Gen  number  seven,  that's  the  gene. And  they  have  a  value, which  we  call  ale  ale. That  value  for  example  gene  number seven  has  an  allele  of  three. That's  a  value. Let's  say,  for  example,  five  cities, 543215  cities.  That's  the  order. That's  a  representation  of a  five  city  traveling  salesman  problem. The  arrangement  tells  you  that first  go  to  City  number  five, then  after  that  number  four, then  after  that  number three,  then  after  that  number  two, and  then  finally  number  one, and  if  it's  closed  circuit, and  then  back  to  number  five. So  that  54321.  Okay. I  say,  Where's  G  number  three? 543.  That's  the  third  gene. You're  pointing  to  that. What's  the  value  or  what's the  allele  of  Gen  number  three? N  number  three,  the  value is  three,  meaning  CD  three. Where's  Gen  number  five? Okay,  G  number  512345, that's  the  gene,  the  last  one,  54321. What's  the  allele? The  value  one. Which  denote  City  number  one. These  are  the  terms  that  we  use. Okay. Let's  go  into  a  little  bit  more specific  in  terms  of  illustrations. So  What  we've  said  so  far  is  very  simple. These  are  phenotype  space  are  available. Usually,  it  is  based  on the  problems  that  we  are  trying  to  solve. So  the  phenotype  space. In  order  to  use  GA  to  solve  it, we  must  do  encoding as  to  represent  the  problem. So  we  do  encoding, it  is  a  representation. Now,  we  say  there  can  be  many  to  one  mapping. There  are  many  different  ways  to  map  it. I  could  map  it, for  example,  as  a  binary. So  I  have  a  binary  gothye  space. So  for  example,  18,  right? In  geno  binaries,  string  is  10010. Two  is  109  is  1001,  right? That  is  just  one  form  of  mapping. Or  I  could  just  use  integer  as  on  its  own. I  could  map  it  also  like  18  means  18,  right? 018.0,  you  know. And  so  on  then  there's a  real  representation real  value  representation. Here  you  get  my  point. Okay.  So  the  representive  many, the  one  different  forms of  mapping  can  happen. And  from  our  representation, we  need  to  decode. Why  we  need  to  decode. Practically,  when  you  do  decoding, because  your  actual  solution, the  manifestation  of  the  actual  solution  is actually  the  so  called  in the  phenotype  space,  right. So  like  your  salesman  problem  is  what  it means  is  the  actual visitation  sequence  of  the  salesman. Remember  what  we  say  about  decoding. Only  one  to  one  mapping. It  cannot  be  like  this  1001  here, decode  to  different  value  of  nine or  9.6,  or  cannot. There  must  be  one  specific  decoding. That's  what  we  talked  about. This  illustration  gives  you an  idea  of  what  representation  is  all  about. So  the  role  or  representation  is  basically to  bridge  right  to bridge  between  the  real  world, the  problem  itself  and  the  algorithm. So  whatever  the  real  world, the  problem,  you  need  to  represent  it. Once  you  have  the  so called  the  representation,  right? So  we  are  talking  about  problem  solving, how  do  you  use  G  to  solve. So  once  you  have  the  representation, what's  the  next  step? You  must  think  of  ways  to calculate  between the  different  representations of  the  chromosomes. Okay?  Let's  say  you  have  a  population  of  20. How  good  is  this?  The  individual  number  one. How  good  is  individual  number  two? We  call  that  the  fitness  value. Each  individual  has  a  fitness  value. Again,  why  we  want  fitness  value? Because  that's  a  basis  of  our  selection. How  do  we  calculate  fitness  value? Usually  in  your  optimization  function, in  your  optimization  problem. There's  what  we  call  the  objective  function or  some  of  quality  function  or  cost  function. When  we  talk  about  fitness,  a  lot  of  times  A, they  normalize  it  0-1, zero  means  not  fit  one  means  maximum  fitness. It's  quite  common  to  do  that. But  really  from  the  problem  perspective, you  can  it  all derive  it's  all  derived from  the  objective  function. So  Fitness  means  that we  derive  some  kind of  value,  figure  of  merit. For  example,  0.8  fitness of  this  individual  is  0.8. O  fitness  of  the  first  individual  is 0.25  and  so  on.  So  that's  a  fitness. So  what  do  you  based  on the  fitness,  what  do  you  do? Well,  you  use  that  to drive  your  algorithm,  right? And  your  objective  becomes to  maximize  the  fitness. So  you  want  to  maximize  the  fitness. You  say  you  want  to  maximize  the  problem, but  what  if  the  problem  is a  minimization  type  of  problem? Very  easy. You  can  always  convert. Maybe  make  it  negative  or  whatever. Not  not  difficult  not  an  issue  to  convert. Now,  here's a  question  for  you  to  think  about. Right?  Does  you  have  a  problem? Right?  You  can  see that  you  have  a  representation. Normally,  we  solve different  types  of  problem. The  problem  can  be  on  a structural  design  like  for a  satellite  system  or can  be  a  scheduling  problem, or  can  be  a  control  problem  and  so  on. Okay?  In  your  GA, Do  you  think  you know  what  the  problem  is  about? Do  you  know  that  that  is a  structural  problem,  right? Or  do  you  even  care? I'm  not  sure  if  you  get  my  point  or  not. I  this  can  be  any  problem. Could  be  a  representation  of finite  step  machine,  you  know,  right? But  then  when  you  solve  it  as  a  GA, what's  driving  your  GA? What's  driving  your  GA? Your  fitness?  Right? That's  your  GA  really  care or  this  is  a  structural  design  problem. Is  a  filter  design. Can  you  see  your  GA  doesn't  really  care? It's  very  complex  here. But  in  your  GA, all  it  cares  about  okay. You  know,  that  objective  function  and then  the  fitness.  That's  all  it  cares  about. Then  the  algorithm  just,  you  know, evolve  to  many  generations  with objective  of  maximizing  the  fitness. Right? That  is  why  GA  is  so  popular, I  would  say,  you  know,  right? It  is  popular  because  it  is  simple, simple  to  simple  to  represent  it. So  once  you  understand  the  problem, think  of  how  to  represent  it  and  then  find a  fitness  way  to  calculate  the  fitness. That's  all  GA  is  all  about. And  that's  why  over  the  years, it  has  become  so  popular,  right? Because  it  kind  of  like  whatever  complexity, it  kind  of  so  called  decouple it  right  with  the  actual  problem  solving. Quickly  about  the  populations. So  in  the  algorithm  itself, we  work  with  samples. Many  algorithms  solve  it  like, for  example,  your  hill  climbing, you  work  based  on  the  individual, you  have  one  solution,  you keep  on  improving  on  that  solution. That's  more  like  a  climbing  technique. But  in  GA,  it  works with  samples  like  population  of  50. Now, what's  the  implication  when  you  have  many? Can  you  imagine  you are  searching  different  spaces all  at  the  same  time? Because  it's  a  population a  population  of  ten. All  right? Each  of  the  individual  is a  representation  of  a  particular  space. You're  actually  branching  on  in the  ten  space  at  the  same  time. So  at  the  same  time. So  that's  why  people  say. Some  people  say  GA  is  a  parallel  algorithm, and  that's  what  it  means. But  of  course,  when  we  run  on  our  computer, it's  just  we  do  it  sequentially. But  potentially the  nature  of  the  algorithm  is, it  is  a  kind  of  a  parallel  search. I  a  population  is  ten, essentially  you  are  searching ten  different  spaces.  All  right. So  that  is  also  one  of  the  trait,  you  know? So  it's  not  wrong,  is  also a  so  called  parallel  kind of  a  search  algorithm,  right? Or  it  can  be  implemented. So  they  are  all  individuals,  right? Even  with  representation, ka  we're  dealing  with  numbers  here. So  it  can  be  similar  also,  right? Similar  is  good,  right? It's  some  kind  of  redundancy,  okay? We  say  population  is a  basic  unit  of  evolution. It's  the  population  that  is evolving,  not  the  individuals. Selection  operators,  act  on population  and  variation  at  on  individual. When  you,  you  select  from the  population  and  the  variation  ad on  the  variation, recommendation,  and  mutation. They  act  on  the  individuals  itself. So  someone  not  about  EA. Okay. So  there  are  some  EAs  that so  called  confined,  all  the  population, all  the  individuals  on  a  grid  structure, And  Why  do  they  do  that? Well,  one  of  the  concept  of GA  search  is  the  concept  of  neighbors. Just  like  in  your  other hill  climbing  techniques, you  search  on  your  neighbor. GA  also  people  have  begun  to  explore. When  you're  doing  a  s, if  you  have  a  solution, There's  a  high  chance  if  you  move a  little  bit,  right? The  solution  might  be  better. So  you  search  within  the  neighborhood. So  people  think  of  different  ways,  you  know, how  to  so  called  incorporate, suitable  concept  of  neighbors within  a  GA  context. We  mentioned  about  diversity. Remember  I  said  there  are two  forces  that  one  increase  the  diversity. The  other  so  called causes  the  diversity  to shrink  they  are  opposing. But  yet  we  want  both  the  forces. We  cannot  say  it's  just  one the  diversity.  To  much  diversity. If  it's  all  about  diversity, what  are  you  doing  actually? If  your  algorithm  is  just all  about  creating  that  diversity, what  es  actually  searching? What  techniques  are  you  using? You  understand? So  just,  you're  just  creating  that  diversity. So  you  are  basically  doing  a  random  search? Right?  You're  just  searching  randomly? You're  just  creating  diversity? On  the  other  hand,  if  you are  you  that  diversity. You  may  also  be  probably  won't  be  able  to solve  the  problem  very  effectively because  it's  too  confined. It's  not  a  global  search. So  you  that  global  search  capacity. Again,  a  good  GA  both  are  balanced. So  what  do  we  mean  when  we  say  diversity? Actually,  they  are  different  meaning. Diversity  in  terms  of the  genotype  space,  right? Or  diversity  in  terms  of  the  genotype, the  values  are  all  very  different, the  chromosomes,  and  so  on. All  right.  So  it  could  take  on  a  different so  called  realms  when we  talk  about  diversity. All  right. So  and  selection,  based  on  the  diagram, you  see  the  importance  of  selection. Be  that  becomes  the  basis  of  reproduction. Now,  what  what  we need  to  be  clear  about  selection it  is  stochastic. It  is  probabilistic. There's  always  that  chance. It  is  not  deterministic. Deterministic  means  that  every  time you  do  is  exactly  the  same. For  example,  if  I  say  the  probability of  selection  is  0.1, the  chance  is  0.0  0.9, for  example,  this  individual has  a  probability  of  selection  of  0.9. Means  90%  of  the  chance  it  will  be  selected. The  same  mean  is  always  selected. No. Right?  That's  stochastic,  you  know, 90%  he  will  be  selected. There's  that  10%  chance he  may  not  be  selected. So  that  10%,  right, would  mean  that  another  individual that  is  worse  off,  gets  selected,  right? That's  how  the  whole  GA  works,  you  know? You  don't  totally  like 100%  write  off  solution  that  are  not  so  good. You  still  incorporate  that  kind  of chance  for the  not  so  fit  individuals  to  emerge,  right? So  it's  kind  of  like  in case  we  are  wrong,  you  know,  right? The  worst  individual.  It  still has  a  chance  to  surface. Right. So  keep  in  mind, we  are  doing  more  like  a so  called  a  probabilistic,  right? So  stochastic  actually  is a  mechanism  that  can help  us  to  escape  from  local  optima. Local  optimum  are  sub  optimum. But  if  you  get  stuck  there, you  will  never  reach  the  so  called a  better  optimum  or  a  global  optimum. There  are  many,  many,  many  different ways  to  do  selection. Most  of  the  selection  or  in  fact, selection  are  based  on  fitness. The  general  rule,  the  fit  individual has  a  higher  chance  of  selection. One  simple  way  is  Rule  selection. The  individuals,  fitness  A  equal  to  three, B  equal  to  one,  C  equal  to  two. The  term  Red  wheel, you  know  what  is  the  rule  wheel,  right? The  wheel  in  a  casino that  has  different  slots. So  they  are  all  equal  slots. If  the  slots  are  equal, that  means  chances  of  the ball  landing  on  any  slots  is  the  same. But  in  our  selection, the  size  of  the  slot  is according  to  the  fitness. That's  why  a  lot  of  times  to  be  more  precise, we  say  this  is  a  bias. Bias,  meaning  that  the  good  one will  have  the  so  called a  bigger  slots  and  so  on. No  need  to  explain  too  much. That's  basically,  this  is one  form  of  selection. Now,  if  you  read  further, there  are  other  types  of so  called  selection  selection based  on  tournament,  you  know,  right? You  create,  you  choose randomly  five  individuals, and  then  you  decide  on  the  winner based  on  the  fitness,  right? That's  called  a  tournament. And  there's  also  selection  based  on  ranking. So  Ranking  means,  ten  individuals, this  individual  is  rank  number  one, this  individual  rank  number  two, and  so  on,  that  kind  of  ranking. So  what  is  clear  to  you is  when  you  do  according  to  like  a  buyers, it  specifically  incorporate the  so  called  the  value  of  the  fitness. But  when  you  do  ranking, even  if  the  difference  is  very small,  You  know,  ranking,  right? Ranking  means  I  rank  number  one number  two  Between  number  one  and  number  two, there  is  only  0.1%  difference. But  regardless  that  is what  the  purpose  of  ranking,  right? Regardless  of  what  the  absolute value  is,  it  ranks. So  different  types  of  so  called  ranking a  selection.  Which  one  is  better? That  depends.  So  I  just  want to  open  your  mind in  terms  of  your  perspective, you  know,  on  the  possible  selection. Selection  could be  selection  for  reproduction. Reproduction  means  to  select  the  parents. Now,  the  other  part  of  the  selection  can happen  when  we  want  to  select  the  survival. The  survival  selection  is basically  for  replacement  to  replace the  pop  to  create the  population  for  the  new  generation. So  they  are  quite  often,  right? In  your  parents  selection, selection  for  parents  tend  to  be  stochastic, probabilistic  right  Parent  selection. First  block  from  population  to the  parents  is  stochastic.  Right. And  the  selection  for  survivor,  right? The  survivor,  meaning  the  new  population, that  is  usually  deterministic. All  right.  Remember,  the  selection for  survival  includes the  parents  and  the  offspring. Usually,  there's  a  clear  cut  way, what  we  could  say  the  deterministic  way. Like  one  simple  way  is  just  to  rank both  the  parents  and the  so  called  the  offspring. So  you  rank  them  accordingly. Based  on  the  ranking,  you  just  take the  appropriate  number  and then  make  it  into  the  new  population. Two  types.  So  two  selection we  are  talking  about  just  to  reiterate. One  is  a  selection for  reproduction  or  recombination, meaning  to  select  the  parents. That  selection  is usually  stochastic,  stochastic. Like  for  example, the  reproduction  probability is  0.6,  meaning  that  60% So  it's  stochastic,  right? The  selection  of  parents,  usually, so  called  based  on  a  certain  probability. Wells  the  selection  for  survival or  that  is  deterministic  in  nature? Okay. Let's  finish  up  this  slide before  we  take  a  break. There's  variation  operators. You  understand  selection  already. Now,  they  are  also  operators. Again,  back  to  the  point  about  diversity. Remember,  the  whole  process  of the  whole  procedure  of  algorithm is  to  manage  this  diversity. You  want  to  increase  it, and  at  the  same  time, you  also  want  to  have operations  so call  select  to  reduce  diversity. You  need  to  balance  this. As  such  to  increase  diversity, There  are  variation  operators. Variation  operators,  two  types. One  is  recombination, the  other  is  a  mutation. So  two  types. How  you  distinguish  the  two  types? Well,  mutation  is  usually  of  D  one. It  means  you  take  one  chromosome. You  mutate  only  one  chromosome, you  say  th  one. It's  like  taking  only  one  individual or  one  argument,  you  know, and  then  you  change it  and  cause  a  new  chromosome. That's  mutation.  So  that  is  th  one. At  greater  than  one, which  is  recombination  or  reproduction. Greater  than  one. It's  like  you  choose  two  parents, produce  one  offspring,  or  two  offspring. It  is  two  parents. I  is  A  two,  A  two. So  R  equal  to  two,  for  example,  crossover. Crossover  crossover  two  parents,  T  two. Exchange  information  between  the  two  parents. Producer  of  spring.  So  crossover  is  T  two. It  takes  two  individuals. Can  you  hear  more  than  two  parents? Why  not?  Why  not? But  most  GA  tend to  use  operations  where  the  rit  is  two. But  I  can  foresee. For  example,  if  the  string  is  very  long, like  100  or  200  string  length. Then  in  that  case,  recombination of  two  may  be  useful  or  more  effective. Right.  But  for  now, most  of  the  problems  we  solve, okay,  tend  to  be  cross  over  type  of operation  where  it  is  to,  right? There  has  been  much  debate  about relative  importance  of recombination  and  mutation,  right? But  of  course,  I  think  GA  uses  both. All  your  GA  tend  to always  or  usually  use  both  of  it. So  which  is  more  important? Do  you  think  recombination  is  more  important? Or  do  you  think  mutation  is  more  important? Well,  the  real  answer  is  that, you  know,  both  are  important,  of  course. You  know,  G  A,  you  must  have  both. But  if  put  through  the  test  or  somebody  say, now,  instead  of  both,  can  you  use  only  one? Right? In  di  di,  you  must  choose  only  one. You  can  have  both. So  which  one  do  you  choose? Recombination  or  mutation. Assuming  you  are  force, say  use  only  one  type  of  operation. Which  one  would  you  choose? Recombination  mutation. Recombination,  recombination, create  the  variations. Choose  the  two  good parents  and  then  reproduce. Mutation,  mutation,  on  one  hand,  mutation. In  theory,  mutation  can solve  the  problem,  right. Although  it's  random. But  assuming  you  only use  one  type  of  operation. In  theory,  mutation  is  possible. Mutation  type  of  GA is  possible  to  solve  the  problem. Many  of  the  earlier  versions of  evolution  algorithm are  mutational  type  of  algorithms. It's  like  saying,  you  know, you  randomly  generate  you should  be  able  to  find  in  theory. But  When  you  are  recombination, all  you're  doing  is  take  whatever  is existing  and  then  produce a  new  offspring  and  so  on. So  in  theory,  right  between  the  two, mutation  is  possible,  okay? Okay. Let's  give  you  a  break, and  then  we  come  back  in  about  11:10,  right? Okay. Okay,  let's  let's  carry  on,  right? Uh,  And  just  quickly talk  about  mutation.  Okay. So  Mutation  basically  just calls  small  random  variation,  right? And  keep  in  mind, I  think  this  is  all  Mutation gives  that  random  kind  of  perturbation. So  this  randomness  is the  very  important  feature of  what  mutation  is  all  about. It  is  of  course, the  inspiration  as  in  nature. Mutation  is  some  kind  of  a  random  variation. And  just  to  illustrate,  if,  for  example, a  string  like  this,  assuming this  is  a  binary  coding, so  binary  coding  means  one  is  zero. The  way  we  apply  mutation, normally  we  go  let's  say  mutation  is  0.01. I  is  1%.  So's  you  flip  a  coin  with  1% Hitting  the  head  and  then  99%, you  know,  the  tail. So  if  it  hits  a  heat, it  means  that  you  do  mutation. So  normally,  you  go  one  by one  and  then  you  flip  a  coin. If  it  says  mutate,  then  you  mutate, and  then  you  flip  it  to  zero. So  this  is  again, this  is  based  on so  called  binary  representation. And  the  other  type  of so  called  operation  that give  creates  that  kind of  diversity  or  variation is  your  recombination. So  Recombination basically  try  is  a  form  of  learning, learning  from  what  is good,  meaning  the  parents. When  the  parents,  you  choose  the  parents  and because  there's  a selection  mechanism  in  place, so  the  type  of  learning  you  are  doing  is you  choose  based  on what  is  good  from  the  parents, and  then  combine  the  good  traits. If  two  parents  are  good, then  there's  a  high  chance a  higher  chance  that  the  offspring will  be  better. Of  course,  I  think  in  nature, we  say  this  inheritance. It's  all  about  inheriting  from  so  called the  traits  or  properties  from  the  parents. And  simple  illustration, like  similar  to  what  we  say, is  a  crossover  type  of  operations. You  have  two  parents,  two  parents. And  let's  say  parent  one,  parent  two. What's  the  arity  of  this? Two,  two  parents.  You  take  a  cut. Normally,  you  decide  on  cutting  point, what  we  call  the  crossover  site. Where's  the  cross  over  site? Random.  That's  a  sarcastic  partners. So  you  randomly  decide where  the  crossover  going  to  be. Let's  say,  for  example,  this  is the  point  at  the  fourth  gene. So  you  cut  the  fourth  gene  and  then swap  information  from  parent  one, you  get  111  and  Parent  two,  you  get  000. So  that  is  your  recombination. And  that's exactly  what  crossover  is  all  about. The  crossover  that  H  John  Holland invented  back  in  1975, that  kind  of  like  cause  GA  to  be  so  popular. Initialization. We  say  normally  random. So  if  you  don't  know any  better,  very  straightforward, it's  just  randomly  generate  that's a  starting  point  of  the  algorithm. And  I  was  asking  you,  you  know, is  it  good  to  have  good  starting  point? Is  it  good  to  have  it advantages  to  have  good  starting  point? Right?  Can  include  existing  solutions  or  use problem  specific  heuristics to  see  the  population. So  meaning  your  initial  population, nothing  to  stop  us  from starting  from  good  ones,  isn't  it? Rather  than  randomly? Well,  it  is  certainly  possible. There  are  many  so  called  problems are  solved  using  this  way. But  of  course  saying  that  also, you  must  also  be  cautious. O  from a  theoretical  justification  point  of  view. When  you  start  of  from  a  specific, let's  say,  you  initialize it  with  good  solutions. Then  essentially  in  theory  or  in  principle, you  are  saying  that,  we're going  to  confine  our  search  to  this. But  if  your  optimal  solution  is  way  off, then  you  may  never  reach  anywhere  close. And  termination. Termination  condition, we  check  every  generation. So  there  are  different  types of  termination  condition  we  can  consider. So  for  example,  based  on  the  fitness, so  you  max  out  on  the  fitness  fitness equal  to  one  less  a  solution. So  you  can  terminate  or  you  set  the  number  of generations  I'm  going  to run  it  for  10,000  generations. No  matter  what  solution,  I'm just  going  to  take  the  best. So  there's  also  another  termination. And  reaching  some  minimum  level  of  diversity. That  is  like  saying,  it  converges. No  matter  how  you  do, you  know,  it  just  remains. So  meaning  the  best  solution is  still  around  that  level. You  know,  and  here's also  another  form  of  conversion, reaching  some  specified  number  of generations  without  fitness  improvement. Our  criteria  could  be  like, Okay,  this  is  a  fitness  we  have  achieved. Let's  say  for  another  50 generations,  there's  no  improvement. Then  we  can  use  that  as  a  criteria  to  stop. That  50  generations  kind  of  tell  us  that  ok, it  kind  of  stagnate  there. So  let's  stop. What  you  can  see  is  a  different  types of  operations  that  is suitable  that  can  be  applied. Okay.  So  here  I  think  problems, there  are  variety  of  problems. So  you  can  solve  problem  in,  like,  control, you  can  solve  problem  in,  like, scheduling  or  time  table, anytime  the  problem. So  then  it  begs  the  question, okay,  what's  the  best  way to  represent  the  problem? And  what's  the  best  way? Well,  GA  works  in  a  different  type. As  long  as  you  can  represent  it, so  they  are  binary  strings,  right? Real  value,  finite  state  machines, or  in  terms  of  trees. Now,  here,  binary  strings. Usually  your  GA. The  original  invention  of  the  GA, when  GA  was  first  proposed, it  was  based  on  binary  strings. But  of  course,  these  days, when  you  talk  about  GA, then  it  would  also  include integral  representation  or, you  know,  real  value  representation. So  any  form. So  as  I  reiterated  many  times. So  GA  we  use the  term  GA  very  loosely,  genetically. Okay? So  the  whole  ideology, basically,  what  is  the  best? It  depends  on  your  problem,  right? So  you  must  choose the  representation  that  is the  most  convenient  or  most  efficient. That's  one  thing. And  on  top  of  that,  also, your  operations must  suit  your  representation. For  example,  later  on,  you  see  if  the represented  is  integers, non  repeating  integers, then  whatever  variation  operation you  design  or  use  must  also maintain  that  requirement  of integers  that  are  different. And  so  this  fitness  here, would  be  used  as  a  so called  criteria  for  our  selection. Right. Let's  work  on  one  very  specific  example, or  look  at  one  very  specific  example. By  now,  everybody  knows what  is  queens  problem  or as  originally  first  proposed was  what  we  call  the  eight  queens  problem. It  is  eight  queens  a  chest  board. The  standard  chest  board  is  eight  queens. And  you  must  remember  that  in  the  old  days, our  computational  resources  was  very  limited. Solving  an  eight  queen.  Right? Using  eight  queens,  is considered  not  a  very  trivial  problem  also. All  right.  But  of  course,  I  think  these  days with  computational  horse  power  far exceeding  right  compared  to  back  then,  right. So  eight  queens  is  actually  a  very  trivial, very  easy  to  solve. The  objective  of  eight  queens  is to  place  eight  queens  on  a  egg  by egg  chessboard  in  such  a  way that  they  don't  attack  each  other. What  does  it  mean  by  attacking? Well,  if  this  is  a  queen, this  black  dot  is  a  queen, a  queen  is  vertical. Anything  along  the  same column  would  be  attacking. Anything  along  the  horizontal, same  row  will  be  attacking on  top  of  that,  the  diagonals. Anything  along  the  diagonals has  shown  in  a  blue  part  that  will  be attacking  and  there  are  two  orientation  of the  diagonal  diagonal  that  face  towards the  le  and  the  diagonals that  face  towards  the  right. That  is  essentially  what  a  queen. You  need  to  place  eight  queens  on the  board  in  different  positions such  that  they  don't  attack. Now,  So  you  are confronted  with  this  problem  here. And  as  what  we  said, this  is  the  real  world,  you  know, to  place  the  e  quiz. So  being  confronted  by  this  problem  here, what's  the  first  thing  you  need  to  think  of? You  would  think  of  how  to  represent it,  isn't  it,  right? Of  course,  you  can  think  of using  binary  to  represent  it. Okay?  Or  you  can  think  of using  integral  value  to  represent  it. So  both  are  possible. Right?  It's  possible  to  do  it  binary. So  then  the  next  question  you  asked between  binary  and  integral, which  one  is  better. I  think  quite  natural,  you  say  looks like  indigal  may  offer  a  better  alternative. So  you  choose  indigual kind  of  representation. Right?  Now,  beyond  that, once  you  decided,  okay, I'm  going  to  go  on  indigal  representation. Then  the  next  thing  you  ponder  is. Is  it  just  based  on  the  integer  set? Let's  say  you  have  string  of  88  integers. What  kind  of  information does  each  gene  represent? And  of  course,  when  you  think  about  it, it  offers  several different  possibilities  of  variations. Then  you  go  back  to  your  problem  and  say, what  are  the  constraints  I'm  talking about  in  the  e  queens? Well,  for  one,  you  know, your  column  and  the  rope, they  must  not  be  the  same. And  then  also  along  the  diagonal. What  is  obvious  is that  there  is  a  convenient  way  for  you  to satisfy  the  no  two  queens on  the  same  column  or no  two  queens  on  the  same  row. So  which  points  us  to let's  say  a  representation  like  that. Of  course,  you  could  say,  this  value,  right? You  notice  all  the  values  are  different. All  the  values  are  different. When  all  the  values  are  different, what  are  the  constraints  you  satisfy? You  already  satisfy  the  constraints on  the  same  column. No  two  queens  on  the  same  column because  they  are  all  different  values, and  no  two  queens  on  the  same  row.  Right. So  assuming  this  representation goes  by  that  you're mapping  from  the  phenotype  space, phenotypic  space. So  you  map  it  such  that,  you  know, this  represent  this  represent  the  row. So  the  first  gene  one, It  means  that  the  first queen  is  in  row  number  one. And  then  the  second  queen,  the  second  queen, right,  which  is  number three,  so  is  roll  number  three. That  queen,  row  number  five,  and  so  on. So  it  looks  like  if  I impose  all  these  values to  be  different,  right? The  row  should  be  different,  right?  Correct? What  about  the  column?  How  is  it  satisfied? Well, because  they  are  all  different  positions. You  only  have  eight  positions,  123456. Meaning  the  gene  itself  satisfy the  column  constraint. This  is  gene  number  one. This  is  Gen  number  two,  Gen  number  three, Gen  number  four,  all the  way  to  gen  number  eight. There  are  different  genes. So  each  gene,  one  column. And  then  The  value  is  the  allele. The  allele  is  a  role. I  force  or  impose  the  allele  to  be  different. That's  why  they  can never  be  in  the  same  role  or  the  same  column. That's  my  representation. In  essence,  what  I  have  done is  I  have  met  across  from the  problem  space  into a  representation.  Is  that  the  only  way? Well,  I  could  do  it  the  other  way  also. I  could  say,  this  one  is  a  column. The  position,  the  gene  represent  the  column, and  then  the  value  of  the allele  represents  the  row. I  could  flip  it  the  other  way,  right? The  gene  represent  the  row  and The  gene  represent  the  row  and then  the  allele  represent  the  column. It  can  also  be  the  other  way. So  this  illustrate  that there's  more  than  Besides  binary, binary  is  also  possible  if  I  choose  to  do  it, I  can  also  use  a  binary  coding. But  as  I  said  earlier  on, when  you  compare  between  the  two, it  looks  like  some  kind of  integer  kind  of representation  is  more  convenient. The  problem  is  actually  very  simple and  very  intuitive. So  how  do  how do  we  evaluate  Remember, say  GA  pro  first  thing  you  do  representation. Once  you  decide  on  the  representation, how  you  bridge  between  the real  and  the  problem. So  that  means  your  fitness. How  do  you  calculate  the  fitness? Obviously,  you  say  it's a  good  configuration  if the  number  of  conflicts  is  minimized. Or  you  maximize  the  number  of queens  that  are  not  in  conflict. So  that's  what  you  are  trying  to  optimize. Okay.  So  how  does what  does  that  mean  in  terms  of  fitness? Remember  fitness  is  used as  a  basis  of  selection. Of  course,  at  the  end  of  the  day, you  understand  all  this, but  what  it  means  is  that  you got  to  put  it  into  an  algorithm. Now  we  are  all  promos, we  are  all  engineers  or  programmers. We  need  to  put  it  down  into  a  procedure  on how  it  can  be  solved.  All  right. So  let's  try  and  what  we  call  formulate, formulate  it  based  on our  understanding  on  the  fitness.  Okay. So  let's  let's  see  if  I  can use  this.  Piece.  Okay. Okay.  So  we're  talking about  the  eight  queens  here. So  I'm  going  to  draw an  egg  by  egg  chessboard. So  this  is  a  egg  by  egg  chest.  All  right? Let's  put  some  queen,  you  know. So  if  I  want  to  put  Q, I  can  construct  a  solution.  Right? Let's  try  my  luck,  you  know, see  whether  I  can  let's  say  this  is  my  queen. The  next  one,  I  have  an  option here  or  here  or  anywhere  else. These  three  are  not possible  because  then  there will  be  a  conflict. Let's  say  I  do  it  here. Okay.  And  then  the  next  queen, I  have  the  possibility. See,  I'm  constructing  a  solution.  All  right. So  I  can  do  it  here. And  then  the  next  one,  maybe  I  do  it  here. And  then  the  next  one,  I  can  do  it  here. All  right.  So  so  far  it's  still pretty  good.  And  then  the  next  one. How  about  here?  And  then  the  next  one. Here. And  then  the  next  one, the  only  one  left  is  here. Looks  pretty  good,  right? Is  there  any  conflict? There's  one.  You  can  see. There's  one  conflict  here,  right? So  Of  course,  when  you  draw  it, you  can  see  where  the  conflict. But  how  how  does so  call  your  algorithm  knows, you  know,  whether  there's  a  conflict  or  not? Right?  So  let's  go back  to  our  representation. So  assuming,  right? O  representation  is  such  that  remember, so  far,  we  explore  based  on  indigence,  right? So  let's  say  this  is  my  representation. I  say  the  first  gene, the  gene  represents  a  role, and  then  the  allele  represents  the  color. It's  a  different  from  what  I  show  you. I  just  want  to  show  something  a  different. The  gene  represents  the  so  called  the  row. The  represents  the  column. Therefore,  the  first  one  is  gene. The  gene  is  the  position,  represents  a  row. So  the  first  sen  column  three. And  then  the  second  one.  Five. The  second  15.  I  can  take  this. Second  one,  five,  one,  seven, one,  46,  eight,  and  two.  Can  you  see? The  gene  represents  a  row, and  then  all  represents  row  number  one, column  three,  row  number  two, column  five,  and  so  on. Now  I  need  to  write  an  equation. Right? So  to  write  an  equation, we  have  to  come  up  with  symbols,  right? So  let's  say  my  queue. Equal  to  one,  two, three  all  the  way  to  eight. Keep  in  mind,  I'm  trying to  formulate  it  such  that  I can  solve  it  in  an  algorithm. This  is  an  example  to illustrate  what  we  are  trying  to  do. Now,  how  do  you  what's  your  objective? O  objective  is  to  minimize the  conflicts  or  maximize the  number  of  queens,  right? So  I  have  to  check  through what  the  because  eventually, I  have  to  find  the  fitness. So  I  can  check  on  the  conflict,  right? So  to  check  on  the  conflict, let's  say  I  represent  C  as  a  conflict. What's  the  conflict  for  Q? How  do  you  check?  You  have to  check  for  each  and  every  queen. So  you  have  to  for each  and  every  queen,  you  know, then  you  say  C  plus  C plus C. So  I check  each  queen  to see  whether  it  conflict  or  not. Now  the  real  question  is,  okay, how  do  we  write  this  CQ, CQ  two  and  so  on. So  to  go  to  the  algorithm  side,  all  right. So  I  need  to  find  each  one  of  these. So  I  say  in  general,  Q. In  general,  will  be  equal to  So  when  you're  in  this  quin, you  need  to  check  against all  the  other  queens,  correct? All  right.  Let's  say  Q equal  to  one,  this  quin  here. You  need  to  compare  this  queen  and  this  sen, Q  two,  three,  four,  all  the  way  to  Q. So  your  equation  will have  to  you  have  to  sum up,  you  have  to  sum  up. Let's  say  I  use  the  index  k.  K, I  don't  need  to  do  I I  there's  no  need  to  check  with  itself. So  you  said,  Okay,  go  do. I  s  one.  I  plus  one. All  the  way  to  all  the  way to  eight  right? All  the  way  to  eight So  what  we  have  done  is  that  we  check, you  know,  Let's  say  this  queen  here, I  want  to  check  against  all  the  other  queens. Now,  here's  a  tricky  part. How  do  you  know?  Based  on  the  values. How  do  you  know  they  are  in  conflict? Well,  assuming  if  it's  conflict, we  give  it  a  value  of one  or  penalty  of  one,  right. So  whether  it's  one  or  zero, there's  a  condition  to it.  What's  the  condition? Be  our  column  and  row  satisfied. Now  we  need  to  check  for  the  so called  the  diagonal  part  between  i  and  k. If  I  put  a  value,  let's say  some  symbol  Alpha. Alpha.  Alpha  can  either be  equal  to  one  or  zero. When  is  it  equal  to  one? Is  equal  to  one  I I  The  gene. The  gene  difference  and Ale  difference  is  the  same. The  difference the  absolute  difference  between the  gene  and  is equal  to  the  absolute  difference between  the  allele  value. To  put  it  in  equations, it  means  that  minus  k. Must  not  equal  to K.  This  of  course  is  an  absolute  value. If  they  are  equal,  for  example, let's  find  a  value. Where  is  the  one? Okay.  Row,  Row  eight  is  two. This  is  row  eight. This  is  two,  and  this  is in  conflict  with  this. Row  eight  and  Row  three. And  this.  This  is  in  conflict  with  this. Seven  minus  two.  That's  a  allo  value, Q  i  and  qk, seven  minus  25. Position's  a  gene. This  is  position  one,  two, three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight, three,  and  eight,  three  and  eight, I  minus  three  minus  eight, five,  five  equal  five. So  you  know  these  two  are  in  conflict. So  we  say  equal  one. So  there's  a  conflict. So  you're  counting,  with respect  to  the  others. Of  course,  in  this  case, Q  one  doesn't  seem  to  be  in  any  conflict. So  if  you  go  through  these  numbers, C  q  one  will  be  zero. And  then  it  will  be  00. What  conditions? All  other  conditions,  otherwise. So  therefore,  your  total conflict  will  be  just  C  Q. You  go  equal  to  one  to  eight. So  there's  a  total  conflict. Now,  what  do  you  get  what  does  CQ  means? CQ  is  a  number  of  conflicts,  right? Does  that  tell  you  the  fitness? It  tells  you  gives  you  an indication  of  the  fitness. The  more  conflicts.  That  means the  lower  the  fitness. The  more  conflict,  the  lower  the  fitness, the  less  conflict,  that means  the  fitter  it  is. So  this  is  your  cost or  objective  you  are  trying  to  achieve. This  is  cost  objective  function, you  understand?  This  is  your  objective. How  you  calculate  your  objective  value, right? This  is  how  you  calculate. Fitness  means  when  you  say  somebody  is  fit, it  has  a  higher  value,  normally, it's  like  that,  right? So  for  example,  if  this  individual  is fit  and  this  individual  is  not  so  fit. So  it  means  that  this  individual  that's  fit has  a  value  of  0.8  has  a  fitness, and  then  the  other  individual  is  0.2,  right? So  you  look  at  the  value, you  know,  the  first  individual  is  fit. So  how  do  you  transform  it? So  basically,  I  want  some  function. The  fitness  of  Q. So  you  can  see  right  now,  the  fitness, the  correlation  between the  fitness  and  the  number  of conflicts  is  reverse,  right? So  assuming  I  want  my  fitness  value, this  is  quite  standard, you  don't  have  to necessarily  have  to  do  it  this  way. So  I  I  want  to  normalize  my  fitness  0-1. Assuming  I  want  to  normalize. How  do  you  normalize  this  0-1? Okay. So  you  can  normalize  this. You  can  normalize  this  because  you  want 0-1  and  then  the  relationship, you  know,  the  smaller,  the  smaller, it  is  the  higher  the  fitness. So  you  will  say  one  minus  one minus  C  Q  one  minus  C  Q. One  minus  C  Q. Different  color.  No  mind. C  Q,  you  got  to normalize  it  against  some  value. What's  the  value  to  choose? Common  practice,  sometimes not  so  critical,  right? Sometimes  not  so  critical, meaning  that  you  just  choose a  constant  big  enough. Such  that  it  gives  you the  fitness  value  that  you  want. Normal  practice  or  you  don't  bother  to  check. But  in  this  case,  I claim  you  can  know  for  sure  what's  the  value. That  is  the  most  appropriate  to  use. That  value  would  entails,  right? What  is  the  maximum  number of  based  on  this  equation  here? What  is  the  maximum  number of  conflicts  you  can  have? What's  the  maximum?  Can  you  take  a  guess? Or  I  can  pose  the  question  another  way. What  is  the  configuration? What  is  the  configuration  that  gives  you the  maximum  number  of  conflicts? What's  the  configuration?  Any  guess? All  in  a  row. Well,  we  already  imposed that  they  are  all  different  numbers. If  I  say  there's  a  price  money  or  $50, then  more  will  answer. Okay.  No  price  money. Diagonal,  right? Okay.  Absolutely,  correct. The  maximum  would  be  like, for  example,  you  have  everything  or  diagonal. Let's  say  this  is  your  queen, queen,  queen,  queen, queen,  queen,  queen,  queen, or  the  other  way  round. Now,  count  how  many  conflicts  you  can  have. How  many? According  to  our  formulation,  one, if  assuming  this  is  the  diagonal, Queen  number  one  can  have.  How  many? Seven.  Again,  seven  other  queens. Queen  number  two,  six, Queen  number  three,  five,  all  the  way  to  two. You  have  seven  plus  613  plus  five, 18  plus  422  plus  three, 25,  and  then  plus  two,  27. It  turns  out  that  there's a  maximum  you  can  get. You  actually  have  a  very  nice  cross  fitness that's  mapped  into  zero  to  one  space. So  there's  27. That  constant  is  27. This  is  a  very  nice  fitness  function. So  your  GA  will  just  be  driven  by this  is  just  trying  to optimize  until  it  gets  a  fitness  of  one. Once  you  reach  a  fitness  of one  solution,  the  problem  itself. Is  that  the  only  way  We  can  write  this. Obviously, not  there  are  different  ways,  right? So  maybe  just  for  illustration, can  I  write  C  Q? So  I  do  summation. Summation  from. K  equal  to  one  to  n,  right? And  then  I  can so  meaning  that  I will  check  against  all  other  queens. I  can  also  do  that,  right? So  each  queen,  I check  against  all  other  queens. So  of  course,  the  number of  computations  is  higher. So  this  constant  value will  also  be  different. Right.  So  this  constant  value will  also  be  different,  k? So  if  you  let's  say  you  do  k, let's  say  this  is  equal  to  eight, and  then  there's  a  summation. So  this  is  equal  to  one,  right? So  you  check  i  equal  to  one, and  then  k  equal  to  one  to  eight. So  again,  you  have  Alpha  value. So  what's  the  condition  here? So  this  is  equal to  one, if  this  condition. Anything  else? A  a. Right? Or  I  equal  to  k. Here,  because  it's  just  the  way  we  rode  it. I  just  kind  of  blindly  just check  it  so  we  have  to  kind of  take  care  of neck  condition  and  then  is  zero. Otherwise.  So  how  is it  going  to  change  your  fitness  function? One  minus  CQ. What's  the  value?  You  figure  it  out. So  what  I've  shown  you  the  process  of representation  and  then  so  called  after that  to  bridge  to  the  new  world. The  fitness  function  is  all  about bridging  with  the  actual  problem  itself. So  we  need  to  formulate  it. So  once  we  formulate  it, then  the  next  step,  of  course,  we  code  it. So  I'm  sure  you  can see  that  once  you  can  write  this. So  coding  it  is  just you  already  have  the  problem  solved. Okay?  So  all  this  is  a  paper  attached. A  paper  goes  in  a  little  bit  more  details  on, on  the  representation  of the  formulation.  Okay. So  we  have  the  fitness. So  let's  go  back  to All  right.  Fitness  evaluation. Then  we  talk  about the  variation,  the  variation. So  the  variation  the  mutation. The  mutation.  Remember,  the  coding, the  representation  we  have is  integers  like  this. So  we  must  maintain that  condition  that all  the  values  are  different. When  you  mutate,  what  you  do  is you  randomly  pick  a  mutation  smart. For  example,  you  pick  five. You  pick  the  third  gene  mutate. Then  we'll  take  to  what,  you generate  another  random  number. Let's  say  you  generate  seven. So  this  five  will  become  seven. But  if  five  become  seven, then  seven  repeated  two  times. So  basically,  you  need  to swap  the  seven  to  five. That's  what  mutation  is. This  is  a  very  clear  illustration. Whatever  your  operation  has to  suit  your  representation. Unlike  your  binary,  is  it a  1  ft  to  zero?  That's  it. But  here, because  your  representation  is  such, so  you  must  also  design  your  operation to  map  or  to  suit  the  representation. And  recombination  is  RD  of  two. This  is  eight  queens  problem. We  choose  two  parents, assuming  these  are  the  two  parents, Recombination  in  the  sense of  crossing  over  operations. Assuming  you  have  parent  one, one,  two,  three,  four,  five, six,  seven,  eight,  in  the  blue, and  then  parent  two,  e76. Let's  say  based  on  some  selection, you  decide  these  are  the  two  parents. Crossing  over  means  one. You  just  take  partial  string from  each  of  the  parents. The  first  offspring, 135  comes  from  the  first  parent. The  second  part  of the  spring  comes  from  the  second  parent. How  do  we  construct  the  second  one? The  second  one  goes  according  to  you will  cycle  through the  second  parent  accordingly. So  I  check  number  five, number  five  is  already  there. So  we  skip  number  five. Then  you  go  to  number  four. Number  four  is  not  there. Our  first  for  gene  four  is  four. Then  you  go  to  number  three. Number  three  is  there. Then  you  go  to  number  two. Number  two  is  here. And  then  number  one  already  there. Then  you  go  back  to  the  beginning, eight,  seven,  six,  not  there. So  you  construct  the  first  parent. Then  the  second  parent,  e76, and  then  the  blue  one comes  from  the  first  one. So  what  is  important  for  you  to  see  is  that both  parents  contribute  traits or  characteristics  to  the  offspring. Now,  let's  say  parent  number  one. Parent  number  one  contributes  135. Parent  number  242876,  then  you  say, it  doesn't  look  anything  close, you  know,  doesn't  look anything  close  to  parent  two. But  then  when  you  think  about  it, the  parent  two  actually contributes  in  a  sense, the  order  of  the  remaining  gene. Because  you  cycle  through, that's  the  order  that  it  appears. There  are  many  problems  where the  order  itself  is  very  important. Be  that  constitute  so  called the  solution  that  you  want  at  the  end. Very  simple. And  let's  say  in  this  eight  queen  here, we  can  still  do  like ult  wheel  selection,  we  can. We  can  have  a  simple  rule wheel  based  on  the  fitness. We  calculated  the  fitness, so  we  can  construct  a  Rule  wheel  to  do  it. But  there  are  other  forms  of  selection. Let  me  just  for  the  sake  of  being  different. We  say  parent  selection. Pick  five  parents  and  take  best two  to  undergo  crossover. So  out  of  your  population, you  pick  five  parents. You  pick  five  parents  randomly. And  then  from  the  five, you  choose  the  two  to  undergo. You  see  this  is  also  a  formal  selection. Survival  selection,  right? Several  methods  here. We  the  steps,  right? Survival  is  about  replacement of  the  new  population. All  you  know,  we pretty  much  have  eight  queens  problem. We  tackle  the  eight  queens  problem. This,  the  template  for  the  e  queens  we have  created  as  what  we  have  gone  through. So  looks  like  this, population  size,  survival. That  is  essentially  what a  genetic  algorithm  is. Based  on  this  example,  you can  see  the  simplicity of  the  algorithm  in  tackling  the  problem. Is  e  queens  or this  such  combinator  type is  GA  only  good  for  that? Obviously  not  we  solve also  what  we  call the  function  optimization  problem. So  the  function  optimization  problem. So  we  use  a  simple  example to  illustrate a  function  optimization  problem. For  example,  you  want  to find  if  it  is  a  convex  prom, you  want  to  find  a  maximum point  or  minimum  point. That's  function  optimization. Many  reword  problems  are much  more  complex  than  this. They  are  hyper  dimension. Here  we  look  at  only  one  variable, F  x,  very  simple  example. Rail  world  problems  or  many  problems, hyper  dimension,  five  variables, 100  variables,  or  even  1,000  variables. Sometime  later  I'll  show  you what  a  high  dimension  problem  can  look  like. Let's  say  in  this  example  here, we  consider  a  problem, a  simple  problem  of maximizing  the  function  x  squared. Assume  that  we  want  to  use. Assume  that  this  x  is  an  integral  value. We  make  this  assumption  because  we  want  to make  the  problem  simple enough  so  that  we  can  do  by  hand. But  x  itself  can  be  continuous, can  be  0.216,  can  be 0.798  and  whatever  value  it  can  be. But  let's  just  assume  we  add  the  constraints. This  is  only  0-1  and the  variable  can  only  take  on  integral  value. Okay.  Go  let's  go  through  the  details, right  on  the  steps. The  first  thing,  the  encoding  part, we  say  integral  value  0-31. To  encode  it,  assuming  I  want  to  use  binary, I  will  need  five  bits. Five  bits  will  be  two  to  the  power of  52  values  0-1. And  then  after  that,  I  generate the  initial  population, decoding  and  so  on. Let's  jump  straight  to  this  table. We  want  to  do  a  hand  simulation just  to  see  for  ourselves, right?  Just  to  convince. Although,  I  think  you  are fairly  convinced  right  now, but  let's  just  do  by  hand  to  see the  mechanisms  of  how  GA  works. The  problem  is  a  real is  a  continuous  problem, but  we're  going  to  use a  binary  representation  to  some. And  specifically, we're  going  to  use  a  five  bit  representation, and  we  have  added the  constraint  that  to  search between  the  space  of  zero  to  one. That's  a  constraint.  Here,  let's say  our  population  is  four, our  population  is  f,  right? So  this  is  our  initial  population. How  do  you  get  this  initial  population? You  randomly  generate? So  I  randomly  generate these  four  individuals. Okay. So  according  to  the three  blocks  that  you  see, what's  the  next  step  after you  have  the  initial  population? You  need  to  evaluate  right? You  need  to  go  to  the  phenotype  typic  space and  then  evaluate. In  order  to  evaluate, you  need  to  do  decoding. So  you  de  01101, which  is  equal  to  13,  right? 1100  is  24.  There's  your  decoding. Your  encoding  is  from  the  vo, the  integral  value  to  the  binary. Your  decoding  will  be  the  binary to  the  integral  value.  Why? Because  you  want  to  evaluate? When  you  evaluate,  you want  to  find  the  fitness. The  fitness  is  where  your  real  problem  is. Real  problem  is  the function  optimization  x  squared. That's  your  real  world.  The  problem  scenario. Therefore,  you  apply  that  knowledge  or that  understanding  and  say square  13  square  is  169, 24  square  is  576. So  you're  trying  to  maximize. You're  trying  to  maximize. So  we  can  just  do  sum  up  the  value  is  1170, and  then  the  average  is  293. Let's  normalize  it  to  percentage. 169  over  total  1170  is  foe  0.4, 576,  170  is  9.2  and  so  on. This  is  the  contribution  in  terms  of  fitness. That  means  that  if  you  want  to  do  rut  view, the  size  of  the  slots, the  size  of  the  slots will  be  different  as  according  to  here. Like  for  example,  string,  number  two, will  have  almost  half  the  slots,  49.2%. Okay. Now  we  do  selection. We  do  selection.  Selection  is deterministic  or  stochastic. Domestic  or  stochastic. Stochastic  based  on  probability. So  selection  selection  will be  based  on  fitness. Selection  will  be  based  on  fitness. So  you  can  see  that  according  to the  fitness  here,  the  percentage  here. I  will  first  allocate So  this  is  the  highest  fitness,  49.2. So  I  allocate  it  to  one.  I  allocate  one. So  after  I  allocate  one, the  remaining  is  what  24.2. Because  each  one  has  a  weight  of  25. Correct?  If  you  take  100, if  you  have  four  individuals, each  one  has  25. So  if  I  allocate  one, 49.2  -25  becomes  24.2. Now  the  next  one  I  choose. This  is  24.2,  and  this  is  30.9. The  next  one  I  allocate  will  be  one  here. 13.9  after  I  allocate  one, what  it  left  with  is  5.9.  So  5.9. Now  you  have  14.4,  24.2,  5.5, and  then  5.9.  Who  is  the  highest?  24.2. So  you  allocate  another  one. 24.2  -25  nothing  left. In  the  next  round,  you  have 14.405  0.5  and  then  5.9, which  is  the  highest  14.4. You  alloc  one. So  this  is  a  mechanism I  use  shown  in  this  table. But  what  is  clear  is  that the  file  one  has  a  higher  chance. It's  given  a  higher  chance for  selection  for  reproduction. So  essentially,  I'm  going  to  say, Okay,  my  meting  pool,  right? The  The  string  number one  will  contribute  one  copy. So  you  have  01101, I  have  01101  here. String  number  two,  1100, contribute  two  copies. So  I  have  1-100-011-0002  copies. String  number  30. String  number  four,  one  copy. I  copy  1110  011  here,  10011. U  So  string  number  four,  one  copy. So  we  have some  selective  force  at  work  right  now. So  it's  a  length,  and  then  now the  reproduction  part  is  all  stochastic. We  randomly  choose. For  example,  we  say  we randomly  generate  a  number, the  first  p01  101  will  meet  with  number  two. Number  two  is  this  one  here. So  you  do  a  crossover  at  site  number  four. This  crossover  is  also  randomly  generated. So  you  cross  over  at site  number  four,  this  is  number  four. This  point  here,  number  four. You  have  0110,  which  is  0110, and  then  zero  from  the  second  of  spring. Cross  oversight,  you  randomly  generate. Let's  jump  to  the  third  one. It  says,  1100  cross over  with  mate  number  four, one,  1000  cross  over  with  this. We  say  cross  oversight  number  two. This  is  12  cross  oversight  number  two. You  have  11.  And  then 011  from  the  second  parent,  011. So  that's  how  you  generate. So  you  just  keep  on  going  on  and  not. Now,  the  problem  is  very  small, so  it  doesn't  take  many  steps  for  you  to  do. So  once  you  have  that,  you  have your  new  population,  right? So  just  nice,  we  have  four in  in  a  population, we  generate  four  off  spring. So  To  go  to  the  new  generation, we  also  need  to  evaluate. When  evaluate,  we  do  the  decoding. 0110  is  12,  11001  is  25,  and  so  on. Now  we  check  the  fitness. Quite  clearly,  you compute,  this  is  a  fitness. What's  the  conclusion  you  see? What  can  you  say  about  the  overall  fitness? Quite  clearly,  you  can  see  that it  has  improved  significantly. Initially,  our  overall  fitness. Our  average  is  only  293. We  one  generation  through the  process  of  selection  and  crossing  over. We  have  improved  the fitness  quite  significantly. From  this  exercise  here,  you  must  be  clear. What's  the  forces?  What's  the  mechanisms that  work  in  a  GA  here? It's  through  that  process  of  selection  and then  evaluating  and  then  selection, you  know,  and  survival,  and  so  on. That  three  blocks  there,  keep  on  iterating. And  you  can  carry  on  and practice  and  do  it  as  an  exercise,  right? So  Okay. Let's  do  a  couple  of  more  slides. Hopefully,  you  are  a little  bit  convinced  maybe not  a  whole  lot  or  whatever. A  GA  is  quite  a powerful  problem  solving  technique. So  how  do  you see  GA  in  terms  of  its  performance,  right? So  how  do  you  see? What's  the  power  or  the  performance  of  it? Well,  very  easy  to just  illustrate  it  using  a  graph. If  I  give  you  a  random  search, if  I  give  you  a  random  search, and  I  plot  it. This  is  a  scale  of  all  problems, all  problems  that  you  can  solve. Keep  in  mind  all  problems. On  the  vertical  scale,  there's a  performance  indicator. The  question  is,  if  it's  a  random  algorithm, what  do  you  expect  the  performance  to  be? Random  doesn't  mean  it  doesn't  work. I  will  work,  but  you  would expect  performance  to  be  not  as  good. If  where  does  GA  stands?  Right? Where  does  GA  stand? So  G  is  generally better  compared  to  your  random  set. For  that  matter,  any  algorithm may  be  perceived  as  better. That's  only  logical. Mm.  If  you  have if  you  want  to  solve  a  problem and  you  understand  about  the  problem, you  understand  the  landscape  and  so  on. So  meaning  that  there are  a  lot  of  things  you  know about  the  problem  or  a  priori  information. So  then  you  can  make  use  of  that  information and  design  a  problem solving  technique  that  is  better. So  if  you  have  that, then  there's  a  chance  that your  algorithm  works  very well  for  a  set  of  problems, but  not  so  well  because  it is  Taylor  made  right? Okay.  So  this  is a  general  perception  of what  a  GA  does,  how  it  performs. All  right?  Now,  keep  in  mind  this  is only  this  is  already  1989. That's  the  early  days  of  GA. All  right.  So  this  was primarily  due  to  the  book  by  Goldberg, David  Goldberg,  where  he wrote  the  book  on  genetic  algorithm. The  new  reality. The  newer  reality. GA  is  a  little  bit  more  sophisticated  now. We  incorporate  what  we call  specialized  domain  knowledge. When  you  want  to  solve  a  very  so called  a  problem  that  you  understand  a  lot. If  you  understand  it  is  very  natural, you  want  to  transfer  that  domain  knowledge into  the  problem  solving. Therefore,  it's  very  common for  GA  to  incorporate what  we  call  the  domain  knowledge, domain  knowledge. So  with  that  understanding  here, because  when  you  have  domain  knowledge, it's  supposed  to  make  the  algorithm converge  very  fast, gives  you  a  solution  and also  hopefully  good  quality  solutions. So  with  that  understanding,  right? If  you  were  to  plot  the  performance  graph, let's  say  EA  one,  just  a  basic  plan  EA. Now,  this  EA  one  here, I  will  add  some  knowledge  to  it. I  domain  knowledge  to try  and  improve  the  performance. When  you  improve  the  performance, you  add  some  knowledge. What  do  you  expect  the  curve  to be?  Higher  than  this? Higher. You  would  expect  to  be  this. But  theory  tells  you  that  you  have  occur. Not  necessarily  higher,  right? But  it  cause  that  kind  of deformation  once you  start  having  a  knowledge, so  you  have  this  deformation  here. Now,  as  soon  as  you  increase, the  more  specific  knowledge to  your  problem  solving, it  causes  more  deformation. All  right.  And  the  more  knowledge you  add  onto  it, the  deformation  is  even  more. Now,  here's  the  thing  you  should  realize. Remember,  there  is  a  scale  of  all  pros, scale  of  all  problems. Is  a  performance.  Again,  I want  you  to  take  note  of  all  problems. When  you  compare  all  this  curve  here, What  is  your  observation  about the  average  performance across  all  the  problems? What's  your  observation? Same  average  across  all take  note  of  the  word  pale. Not  just  a  specific  target  all  the  problems. Can  you  see  that  the  average, If  you  take  all  problems, the  average  is  the  same.  All  the  algorithms. Now,  that  is  very  bizarre because  it  is  telling  you  that you  all  algorithms  are on  the  average  the  same. Everything,  all  the  algorithms  are  the  same when  you  consider  all  the  problems, on  average,  they  are  the  same. Which  means,  on  average, you  cannot  gain  anything. And  that  of  course  is  what  we  call the  no  free  lunch  theorem. The  moment  you  start  solving some  problem,  better. You  have  to  give  give  way  to some  other  problems  and your  performance  may  not  be  good. There's  some  more  I  want  to  add on  this  because  this  is very  enlightening  from the  viewpoint  of  problem  solving, because  I've  exceeded  the  time. So  we  continue  next  week. I  want  to  make  one  more  announcement. Quiz  will  be  on  the I  thought  I  have  a  slide. Okay.  Never  mind. So  C  his  is  on  the last  first  of  September,  right? But  take  note,  the  timing  because of  the  insufficient  resources. So  I  cannot  get  any  time  slot that  is  the  most  ideal. So  the  only  time  I  can  manage  is  930  to  ten. So  930  to  1030  in  the  evening. So  the  venue  will  be  LT  19  A, LT  two  A,  and  then  LT  five. Where  you  supposed  to  go,  I will  let  you  know  early  on. I  will  make  this  post  this  also  on  NT  Ln, but  just  for  as  far  as  you  are  concerned, plan,  whatever  you  have  to  do  on  that  day, make  sure  that  you  allocate  t  930 onwards  to  1030  quite  late, 1030,  in  the  evening  for  quiz. Okay?  This  will  be  posted  in  NTN  also. All  right.  I'll  see  you  next  week.  Thank  you.
