Good morning. Just a reminder, next week is our quiz. My part only has one quiz. So there will be only one quiz, and the venue is spread out over three LTs, LT19A, which is here, and LT2A, which is across, and LT5. Which LT you will go, I will make it known through NTU Learn. There are strict rules to maintain. For example, you should not sit next to each other. You should maintain one empty seat in between your neighbor.

So this is a written closed book, 15 minute quiz. The format is actually all written. So you provide your answer on the questions paper I gave you. And then at the end of it, it is written, closed book, and at the end you are required to submit personally and then sign it, as feedback.

You only need your pen and picture ID. Nothing else. Don't bring anything else, only your pen and your picture ID. No need to use your phone. You can print out your student card or bring your passport, any picture ID will do. Don't touch your phone, leave it aside. It makes it very complicated if you whip out your phone to show the ID. Of course, mobile phones and smart devices are prohibited.

So that's next week, and time is 9:30 to 10:30. If you are absent without any valid reason, it will be a zero.

Okay, I would like to first summarize what we did the last lecture. Call this recap number two.

So I think we all know by now, or it's quite clear, that this whole genetic algorithm, the inspiration comes from nature. And specifically, there are two aspects where we learn or draw from nature. Number one is Darwinism, natural evolution. Now, the principles are just like rules in nature. So the rules in nature are survival of the fittest, and then the selection, and then the reproduction. So reproduction becomes a reward. So when you have selection, obviously, there's competition, and all this came about because of insufficient resources.

And you probably heard about the term metaheuristics, or you may not have. So genetic algorithm is one of the metaheuristic techniques. So let me say something about the term metaheuristic. Heuristics, all these heuristics are rules of thumb. In your everyday life, you have a certain rule of thumb on how you carry out things. Now, the word "meta" changes the meaning a little. So "meta" can be perceived as a higher form of heuristics, or heuristics about heuristics, or any other additional connotation that comes with it. So the word metaheuristics, in this case, is a heuristic that's not based on human knowledge, but a heuristic that's based on nature. The heuristics of survival, selection, and so on. So that's why the term metaheuristics. So it should be known to you that anytime people say GA is a metaheuristic, so is ant colony optimization, bee optimization, particle swarm optimization. All these are metaheuristics.

The other aspect of inspiration that comes from nature is the genetics aspect. We know about the DNA. We draw on the inspiration, the metaphor of DNA, to use it as a coding of the problem. The physical expression of the world. So these are the two areas of inspiration we draw from nature.

So it's quite nice when you use a technique and then you understand where it comes from, rather than just saying, this is a GA, and I'm using GA. But if you see it further and beyond this, yeah, this is a technique that has an interesting background, being a metaphor inspiration from nature.

So then we went into the EA framework itself. I think you're convinced that the whole framework is actually very simple. It consists of three blocks. I think it's quite clear in your mind what these three blocks mean, like the population, parents, and then the offspring, and how they interplay to form a cycle, which we know as generations. The program or algorithm runs through many generations. Until we reach a state where you can terminate. Terminate depends on conditions, what you need, or convergence, different criteria.

And I hope you understand, using the n-queens, how we went from representation to implementation. So the whole issue is about bringing what you see in the real world, and you have a problem to tackle, and how to bridge it towards the stage where you can implement it as an algorithm. And that's what we talked about, and I hope you are familiar with that.

Representation. Today we will do a lot about representation, how we represent the problem. Essentially, a representation is that you got to represent it such that you describe or represent the scenario in the real world.

And a very, very important concept, GA operates on two main types of operations. The whole idea of the operations in GA is just to create that kind of variation. Why variation, because you want diversity. You want to create that kind of variation. And there are only two types. One is a mutation, and one is a recombination. Mutation is very random. Recombination is like reproduction. What you pass on is a form of learning from what you know in the past. And there is a selective process, or selection process. So whatever operations, you got to suit the representation. Today, we'll look very closely at how the different operations can manifest depending on the different types of representation.

And we did a hand simulation on function optimization. Very simple simulation just to illustrate the concept of how GA, the internals of how GA evolved the population.

So that was what we did last time. So when you study, ask yourself, what do you know about each of this topic.

Today, we continue to talk about evolutionary algorithm in perspective, EA in context. Now, basically, the question you want to ask yourself, if somebody asked you, is: how good is this EA? Obviously, you got to draw some kind of comparison to put in perspective the performance of the evolutionary algorithm. Now, different people would describe or have very different views of it.

Now, what we know quite certainly is, when you have a problem to solve, chances are you design a tool that is good at solving that particular problem. That will be the case. This is a problem, so I come up with a tool. But regardless, what we want and what we hope for, what we wish, is a tool that does well in everything, in all the problems. So we want a tool that's all-purpose. So we wish that could be a tool. And for a while, we were thinking, maybe that's possible. Is it possible? Let's back it up and let's understand in proper context, when we say we are looking for this special tool, an algorithm that can solve all the problems.

So let's consider the traditional view of evolutionary algorithm. I would say the older view, early days, when EA or genetic algorithm first came about. So in order to sketch a performance of algorithms, any problem solving algorithm. On the vertical scale, that's performance. Now, on the horizontal scale, scale of all problems. I want you to pay attention to "all" problems.

If I say this is a random algorithm, you know what a random algorithm is. Just search randomly. What would be the performance of this algorithm? A high chance your answer is, pretty okay. It doesn't not work, but the performance maybe not as good. That's a random search. If you have a special method, tailored to the problem, you customize it, what do you expect the performance to be? It will be very, very good for a restricted class of problems because it is custom.

Therefore, you see this plot. In the early days, EA, genetic algorithm, is touted to be a generally good method, better than your random search. Of course, on certain problems, if you have a custom algorithm, EA may not measure up. That's quite natural. So conceptually, I think we see it as a reasonable description in the context of GA, how it fares against the problems.

In recent years, we have begun to put knowledge into it. So we have begun, in the 90s (and this is one of the areas that I worked in very closely for my research), to incorporate knowledge about the problem into the algorithm. And the reason is very simple, we want to drive the performance up. If you know something or special knowledge about the problem, if you incorporate it in the GA, it should help you to push the performance up, that's what the tendency is. But when you push the performance, when you customize it, obviously, you want to change the performance curve, the one that I showed you earlier.

Now, back to the question. What's your wish in terms of algorithm? An all-purpose algorithm, one size fits all kind of algorithm. An algorithm that solves all the problems. That's your wish. Is that possible? Very naturally you say no. Logically, it shouldn't be possible. There's no such thing, which you are right. But how do you explain from a theory point of view?

In order to do that, let's look at the curve again. This is the EA. EA is generally a good technique. Now, the moment you incorporate some knowledge into it, when there's some knowledge embedded in the EA, obviously, it will solve the problem a little bit better. You create this deformation. EA two, let's say you have even more specialized knowledge, or you have more customization. The curve is deformed. And you have even more customization. So it shows you that you can drive up the performance. But the more knowledge you have, the more restricted is the class of problems. You can solve it very, very well, but the class of problems that it is able to solve is a bit restricted.

So here's a question. Which is better? Which algorithm is better? EA one, EA two, EA three, EA four. Obviously from the curves, you see that if I want to solve this particular problem, EA four is the best. No question about it. But if I ask you, how do you compare the performance on average among all the algorithms, all the problems? What's the average performance among all? I emphasize it with all the problems. What's your conclusion? Same average. You notice that the average performance is the same.

Assuming you accept these graphs as the view of how algorithms fare, the performance of algorithms. So you accept this view. And from these graphs, my question is, what's the average performance for all, I emphasize that, all the problems? Do you agree that the average is the same? So in other words, all the algorithms, they are the same, the average performance.

So put to your question earlier on, do we have an all-purpose algorithm that can solve all the problems? No. Probably not according to this theory. Now, this is what in optimization we call the NFL, the no free lunch theorem. And this is the theory that backs it, rather than just say not possible. We have theory, the paper by Wolpert and Macready. It is kind of a classic in optimization. It proves what they call the no free lunch theorem. There's no free lunch in optimization. The moment you do well in one problem, you will sacrifice on the performance of other problems.

Optimization. Whenever you think about optimization, people say no free lunch, you understand what it means. And a good graph to depict it. This is the performance.

So in global optimization. Sometimes, many times, I talk to people, they always use the term global optimization and optimization very loosely. Now, to be technically correct, you got to be specific. If you are talking about global optimization, that means that you are searching over all the possibilities. You're doing a global search. So you're finding the best solution out of the best. Take note, you want to look for the best. That's your objective, but whether you get it or not, that is another issue.

So GA offers itself as a heuristic approach, or more specifically, what we call a metaheuristic approach. Now, let's do a little bit of comparison to see the characteristics. So typically, in the early days, our techniques are usually the deterministic approach. For example, your branch and bound method. Deterministic. Put it very simply, every time you run it, it is guaranteed to find the solution. If the problem is complex, it may take too long. In theory, you should be able to find it, but it's just impractical. We saw earlier on that there's this NP kind of problem. If you use a deterministic approach, you may never solve it in your lifetime. That's what deterministic approaches are.

Heuristic approach. That's why people use heuristic approach. So heuristic approach is basically rules. Rules for deciding, okay, where do I go next? So I have a certain rule or heuristic that guides me in the search. But the characteristic of heuristic, because it is a search that is guided by rules, and these rules are non-deterministic. So no guarantee the best solution is found. There's no guarantee, and no bound on time. Ask me for what's the worst case computing time, the best I could say is I should be reasonable at the time. I don't have a specific quantitative formula to give you the bound.

So on the deterministic approach, basically your mentality is, I don't really care if it works, as long as it converges. As I said, deterministic approach, especially in light of the problems that we are dealing with, the complexity, a lot of times it doesn't work, but it does converge. So when it converges, it may not be even close to the best solution. Whereas heuristic is the mentality that I don't care if it converges, but as long as it works, it will give you a solution, a reasonably good solution.

So generally, we have global optimization and there's also a neighborhood search. So basically, when we talk about local search, you know global search. And then you say, what's local search? Local search, you search within your vicinity. So when you talk about local search, the term or the concept of local means that you're searching nearby. You're looking around your neighbor. If you have a solution, you say, where do I go next? So if it's local, then you will look around your neighbor. Sounds very simple. But what is the meaning of neighbor? Well, neighborhood could mean different things. For example, in your coding, it could mean a difference in the gene value. Or it could mean, when converted to the phenotype expression, it is very similar. Or it could mean the Hamming distance or different measures. So that's what neighborhood means. So be clear that when you talk about neighborhood in GA, it could mean different things. And a lot of the time, the heuristic technique that we use is based on the structure of the landscape, so that we understand what the neighborhood means. So this is pertaining to what we see as more of a localized search.

Now, today, I want to carry on, and I will go to the second set of notes. So you see where GA stands now. You understand the NFL, no free lunch. I find that NFL is a very interesting concept, for that matter, on how you will see problems or life in general. There's no free lunch in whatever you do, and in optimization, same thing.

So now let's talk about specifics about implementation. And clearly, one of the more important aspects of optimization using GA, when you're trying to solve a problem, is to first think of a way to represent. Based on the problem description that you have, how do you represent the solution? How do you represent it as a chromosome, such that your GA is able to manipulate it.

So there are generally five types of representation of the genomes in GA. Number one is the most common, the binary. When GA was first proposed back in 1975 by Holland, he relied a lot on, or he demonstrated using, binary coding or binary representation. From there, it became very popular and many problems were solved using binary representation. But of course, these days, it is also very, very common to see integer representation. So the string itself is represented as integer. And there are also many, many problems that are real value. Like for example, the control setting. Let's say in your PID control, how do you decide what's the setting of the gain? For example, permutation, and lastly, tree. So we look at these five types of representation.

Now, because the representation are different, you must have variation operators that suit the representation. Whatever works in binary may not work directly in, let's say, integer. But by and large, there are commonalities or similarities between the different types of operations. So the operations are variation operations. In particular, we know of two, or usually in GA, there are two. There's a recombination and mutation.

So this whole structure, right now you are very familiar with it. So if you can visualize this, I think you have a pretty reasonable appreciation of the whole framework or structure of an EA. So representation is the first step in building an EA. It is the step that bridges the real world problem to the GA, the algorithm itself. And along with that also, depending on your representation, you got to think about the mutation and recombination or crossover. So what variation operators you use depends on the representation.

For example, if you think in terms of a traveling salesman problem, there are different possible representations. You can use binary, although you will see later on that binary representation may not be the most suitable or convenient for TSP. Or you can use another type, which is a permutation representation.

So let's quickly look at first the binary representation. I've said it a few times. Binary is when GA was first demonstrated or proposed. It was mainly on binary. Many problems have been solved using binary representation. The idea of binary representation is very simple. You have a phenotype space. This is like the problem itself, the problem that you're trying to solve. Now, this problem you're trying to solve, once you understand it, you got to think of how to represent it. Let's say in our mind, we decide we want to use binary representation. So the process of converting your problem, which corresponds to the phenotype space, to the chromosome or the genotype space. So that is called encoding. Encoding is representation, as in this case, binary strings. So the genotype space, because it's binary, it is in the space of discrete values of {0,1} to the L dimension. L would be the length of the string. So that is representation.

Of course, at the same time also, you got to think about decoding. Decoding is just the opposite or inverse of your representation. And quite straightforward, using binary.

Then of course we think of the mutation type of operation. Mutation is a little bit random. Usually driven by probability. So this probability is a probability of mutation. For example, when you say 10% mutation, that means that one in ten chance that it will mutate. And when it mutates, what's the value? The characteristic of mutation is it generates randomness to create that kind of variation. So when you mutate a gene, a binary, which is either zero or one, and it is random. If it is zero when you mutate it, if it says to mutate, what's the other possible random value? The value is one. If it's one and you mutate it, you mutate it to zero. In that sense, mutation in binary is straightforward, because the genome space is only zero and one.

Normally, we have p_m, the probability of mutation. There's a general guide here that says the rate of mutation usually not big. Typically between one over the population size and one over the chromosome length. There's just a guide. But just remember, mutation rate usually is small. What happens if you put very high mutation rate? What does that mean? If the mutation rate is very high, for example, 0.8 or 80%, what does that mean? You're just randomly flipping. So chances are that will be closer to just a random search approach. Mutation is you incorporate randomness, but only sporadically, not too frequently, because if it's too frequent, then that is just like doing a random search.

The way we incorporate mutation, for example, you have a string here. Mutation, remember, is a unary operation. It takes one chromosome, and then it carries out the mutation. Normally, the way it is done is you go to the first gene, flip a mutation coin. Mutation say yes, then you do mutation. For example, you go to the first gene, you flip this mutation coin, it says mutate, then you flip it to zero. Then you go to the second gene and flip the mutation coin. It says don't mutate, so it remains as one. Then go to the third one, mutate, change to zero, and so on. That's how mutation is.

So let's ponder a little bit about mutation. Mutation is to cause that variation, and also remember that this is a bit random. So when you create the kind of randomness in the variation, hopefully you'll see equal chance. But when you think about, let's say, binary coding. For example, if I say this is a binary coding, when you decode it, it represents an integer. So meaning the phenotype space is integer value. Now my question is, mutation on the earlier genes as compared to mutation on the later genes. Which one has more effect? Remember I said the binary coding, when you decode it, it is integer value. So mutation on the earlier, the more significant genes, compared to the less significant genes, which one has greater effect? Obviously, you will see that the more significant bits. So remember, we say mutation is supposed to be random. So in that sense, there's some kind of bias. So there's one mutation that has more effect depending on the coding. So if that becomes an issue for you, then you got to think of a way. So one way is, maybe use Gray coding.

Okay. So let's move to crossover. Mutation very straightforward, by recoding, zero to one, one to zero, and it is random and based on mutation rate p_m, usually very small. Crossing over, the purpose is a form of recombination or reproduction. So it implements what we call the inheritance, a form of learning in nature. So we decide on a crossover point. So this crossover point is to split the parents into two strands. So this is a whole chromosome here. So if this is my crossover site, I essentially split the chromosome into two parts. So I do crossing over. So after I choose the crossover site, I construct the children. Part of it comes from parent one, part of it comes from parent two.

And remember, I think you understand the framework involved. Parents are already being selected because of the fitness. There's a selection at play. So normally, whatever parents are selected, usually they are fitter. So when you carry out this crossover or reproduction, then chances are the parents are generally better among the population. With this crossover, you combine traits from two parents and then generate an offspring. Hopefully the offspring will evolve to higher fitness.

Is that the only crossover? Well, we can look at other possibilities in binary. So binary is a little bit more straightforward. So there's nothing that stops us from doing a multiple site crossover. For example, choose more than one crossover site. So I think you would see this as somewhat useful, especially when you have very long strings, like a couple of 100 bits and so on. So this is multi point crossover, choose more than one point. So when you have a multiple point, choose n random crossover points. n is the number of crossover sites. Then we split the chromosome along the multiple sites, and then we group parts alternating between parents. So the offspring that is generated, we just alternate: the first 0000 comes from parent one, and then after that parent two contributes 111. And so on. So quite easy to see what is going on here.

We can have uniform crossover. Just go to each one and then just randomly flip.

So this is when one of the early days on GA. So in the early days on GA, they were mainly binary coding types of GA. And what Holland proposed was that you have mutation and crossover. The idea of crossover was quite novel at that time. And then along the way people began to wonder, do I necessarily need these two types of operations? So questions or debates as to which one is more important, can you just focus on just crossover without the mutation or vice versa? And of course, people have begun to generally accept that both are important. This is particularly so if you understand it from the point of view of diversity. In optimization, is juggling, or you manage. The whole issue is about managing diversity. You want diversity. But at the same time, you also want to be very specific, meaning when you do the selection you choose for the best solution. So both affect the diversity differently. So both the recombination and the mutation have different roles in terms of increasing the variation to give the diversity. Now, on the other hand, there's selection that causes the diversity to come down.

And we already asked this question earlier on. If you have to choose between these two, which one would you choose? Well, we already know the answer. Mutation-only EA is possible, crossover-only EA would not work.

So from the concept of diversity. Optimization is about managing diversity. Now, when you do a search, you have a landscape. Imagine like you are searching for a solution in a landscape. Two processes are involved. One is that you want to explore. You want to explore as much as possible. At the same time, because you are looking for a solution, the solution that's best, you also want to exploit. If you know something is really good, you want to exploit, make it even better. There are two forces at work here. There's exploration and exploitation. So they are both necessary, the exploration and the exploitation. So there is a balance between the exploration and exploitation.

So it turns out that your crossover is exploration. It's explorative. So it makes a big jump to an area somewhere between the two parents. A little bit like interpolation. You have two parents here, you'll find something that is in between. You explore in that sense. Mutation is exploitative. You already have a solution. Now you're hoping that if I make a small variation, then maybe there's a chance that it will be better.

If somebody comes around and say, look, my GA is not working that well. From a high level perspective, you say you must incorporate more exploitation. So in the context of GA, maybe increase the mutation a little bit, or increase the crossover to improve the performance.

These are some of the characteristics again. Only crossover can combine information from two parents, and only mutation can introduce new information. That's something to think about. If you have binary coding. Let's say initially, the frequency of zero is 50%, frequency of one is also 50% in the population. After ten generations, the frequency of zero and one. Same or different? Initially, the number of zeros and number of ones, the ratio is one to one. After ten times crossover, what is the ratio? Should still be 50%. Crossover doesn't alter it. But mutation does. That's why you can imagine that if you have only a crossover operation, and in your binary coding, after 100 generations, the number of zeros and ones is still the same. So there's no that kind of random variation that is incorporated. So therefore, that's one way to explain why mutation is necessary. Because mutation still plays a role to explore. Explore by introducing new information.

There's binary. Let's talk about integer representation. Binary, of course, is something that we started off with. When GA first came about, we mainly used binary representation. As we solve more and more problems, we began to see that other representations may be more effective and more convenient. One representation that we can think of would be representation as integer. Integer means that instead of the zero and one genome space, now it is one, two, three, four. For example, there are four classes. Your genome space will be a set of values. So let's say you want to encode color, there are three values, RGB, for example. Those are integer values. You want to do sorting. What's the best way to sort a list of items into three classes? In your coding, you may have {1, 2, 3}, one corresponds to class one, two corresponds to class two, and three corresponds to class three.

So then we would think about, if it is integer representation, how would we do mutation? Mutation in binary is quite clear cut. There's no argument about it, zero flip to one, one flip to zero. What about if it's integer representation? For example, you have integer set of five, one, two, three, four, five. When you mutate, what are the possible ways you can cause the gene to alter? So one way is to add a small positive or negative value to each gene with probability of p. So you add a small value, which is positive or negative. But in doing that, there's this possibility of what we call creeping. Because you only make a small step. In time, as the generations progress, many of the individuals in the population will creep towards similar value or convergence. The result of this is what we call premature convergence. So that's what can happen in your integer representation. So another way is just random resetting.

Now, I need to emphasize on the fact that, unlike in your binary where it's zero to one, a complete change. But if it is an integer representation, adding positive or negative value is possible, but every time you just move it one small step. So although that sounds like it will work, but there's a creeping phenomenon that can happen in your integer representation. And then we can do random resetting, a random reset with a certain probability. And recombination is quite similar to your binary. Whatever we did in your binary for the crossover is also applicable in your integer representation.

So, not sure if you have heard of the graph coloring problem or not. One way to illustrate is, imagine you have a map of the United States. So you are a printer, and let's say you want to print this map, make it easily visible. So then you need to color it. So you need to color it with different colors, the different regions. For example, the first region here, and this one. If you color them in the same color, then you cannot distinguish. So it is best like this region, the one I'm pointing to, and this adjacent region are different colors. So your role is to assign different colors to different regions, with the requirement that two adjacent regions must not have the same color.

So when people solve this problem, this becomes a graph coloring problem. So for example, you can say this is region one, this is two, this is three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and so on. So each of the regions is assigned an identity. Then this is called a graph coloring problem. Your representation could be a graph. So if you look at it, region one is connected to two, and then two is connected to three, six is connected to one. And then seven and two, and six, five, four, and so on. So then you see how we can actually represent it as a graph.

Now in graph coloring, this is your edge, and this is your vertex. Basically the problem becomes one of assigning a color to each of the vertices, such that vertices that are adjacent to each other should not have the same color. That's essentially how you represent the problem.

So when you do your coding, let's say you have three different colors. You are the printer, you have three different colors to use. Your coding could be: gene one represents region one. So region one is assigned color one, then color two, one, three, two, one, one, three. This will be a coding, this is an integer coding. Your genome space is {1, 2, 3} to the power of L. L will be the number of regions. That's essentially what we are talking about in graph coloring.

So GA can solve this without much difficulty. I would say not difficult to come up with a GA to solve a problem like this. And not only this, there are many problems in classification. So the question asked would be, in general, we say this is a K-coloring problem. What is K? K is the minimum number of colors to color all the regions such that no two regions adjacent to each other are the same color. And we always want the minimum number of colors.

So assume k equal to three. What is suitable for GA? If k equal to three, then the genome space will be {1, 2, 3} to the L dimension. So it is basically integer coding. So you can write an objective function to evaluate each chromosome. So we can go through and do it, but I want you to use it as a practice, on how to write the objective function. Based on this coding, write an objective function to evaluate the chromosome. Think about the thought process on how to formulate the objective function.

So k equal to three. For the map of the United States, k equal to three, is it possible? It has been shown that three colors is not enough to color the map of the United States. So therefore, you need more color. With three, you cannot color the map of the United States.

Now what if k equal to four? Again, you can think about the representation. In this case, the genome space will be {1, 2, 3, 4}. Then you can write the objective function. So k equal to four is possible. In fact, it has been proven that k equal to four is enough to color any given topology of regions. And you can show just by your own illustration. Take some maps, for example, the maps of the regions in Singapore, all the different regions. Then see whether three colors is enough to color the different regions.

So that is integer representation. Quite clearly, you see how integer representation fits into some problems.

Now let's think about real value or floating point representation. So we have looked at binary, we have looked at integer. So naturally, another alternative would be real value floating point. So many real world problems, like your control problems, or filter design problems, you have some parameter values that you need to decide, to find the best set of values, and these values are real value. If you want GA to find the real values, a very natural tendency is to represent it as real values.

Now, in the GA community, one of the most common problems that is used to demonstrate the robustness or flexibility of GA is in function optimization. In function optimization, there are many benchmark functions that are available in literature. Benchmarks are a set of standard problems that are made available to everybody. So when you design an algorithm, you use the benchmark to test your performance. So in the real world problems also, essentially the whole issue from a mathematical standpoint is that it is a mapping. It is a function, a mapping from the real value space of the n dimension to R, a real value.

So let's say, for example, in this function here, this is called the Ackley function. Go to literature, look for function optimization and you can see hundreds of all these benchmarks. If we pick one function here, the Ackley function, so this is the equation of the Ackley function. The equation says f(x) is equal to minus 20 and so on. This is the function. Usually, in function optimization, you want to optimize the parameters such that the function value is either maximum or minimum. You want to find, for example, the maximum point or the minimum point.

Let's say in this case here, this is of dimension two. That's why we can plot it. So vertically, that corresponds to the f(x), the f value. So if you were to plot this for dimension of two, or two variables, the horizontal part will be the two variables and the vertical will be the function value. So from here, you can see that you're trying to solve for the minimum value, trying to find a minimum point. This is a benchmark. So if you look at this equation, it says minus 20 exponential minus two square root of one over n, and then summation one to n. So this n is the dimension of the problem. Or to put it another way, there are two values, two variables you are trying to solve for this particular representation. So if n equal to two, then there are two variables. For two variables, when you plot this, this is what it looks like, and you're trying to find a minimum point. So because it is a benchmark, you know the minimum point is actually (0, 0).

So you configure a GA. Question. How big can n be? This is a benchmark. It is meant to be flexible. n can be ten, n can be 100, n can be a thousand. When you do research, you want to solve to demonstrate the power of your algorithm. You go to high dimension. So n can be 5,000 or even 10,000. So that is typically the nature of benchmark problem. So GA has been known to solve this kind of problem. And quite often able to find the optimum point, which is zero.

In terms of hyper dimension, many variable problems involve many dimensions or many variables and could be 100, meaning that it is a function of 100 variables.

Function optimization is obviously very suitable as a real value. You say, what's a natural way or best way or convenient way to represent the function optimization? Assuming that all the variables are real value. Does that mean that we only solve it as a real value representation? Not necessarily. So to be complete, we must also realize that even for real value problem, we can also use binary representation.

Let's get some notation. So in your real problem, normally you are trying to find a value between x and y. This x here, x is 0.1, and then y is one. Meaning that you are trying to find any value between 0.1 and one, so it's bounded. This square bracket here indicates the bounding. So there's a range from x to y. So you're trying to find a value from x to y, which is a real value. R represents real value.

Now, if you want to map it into binary or discrete values, then you use a string of length L. What is L, L depends on the accuracy or resolution that you want. So you must remember you're mapping from infinite space. Because if it's real value, it's infinite, the number of possibilities is infinite. So if you go into integer, you go into a discrete space, a finite space. So this is a string, and essentially mapping a real value to this string, a_1 to a_L, in a {0,1} space of the L dimension.

So how do you do the mapping or the conversion? So this equation here, gamma. So the mapping would be, let's say you have a binary string. How do you convert it to a real value? You can see from this equation, you take x plus (y minus x), that's the range, and then divide by the number of steps (two to the L minus one), and then you sum up all the bits, and multiply each bit accordingly. So essentially, you can see also that if you want it to be of high accuracy, then L got to be bigger. You need to use a longer string, if you want a better resolution. And too high, of course, that will result in slower, more cumbersome, takes longer to evolve.

So you can do a practice of conversion. For example, if I give you a string A equal to 100... let's say if I give you this string. And the real space is bounded by 0.25 and 1.88. What's the equivalent real value of this string? Maybe you do it as a practice at home. Very simple, straightforward exercise.

So as with our binary and integer. We talk about mutation and crossover. So in your real value representation, there's also mutation and crossover. How do you effect this mutation and crossover in real value?

So let's start off with mutation. If you have a set of real value variables, x_1 to x_n. So when you mutate, you should have a new randomly generated chromosome with different values, because that's the purpose of mutation. Normally, what happens is that you would set a bound. A common or intuitive way of doing it would be to set a bound, meaning your target will be bounded by this lower bound and then the upper bound. What's a new value? Randomly between lower bound and upper bound. This is like in binary, you're flipping it, or in integers, you randomly reset it. Quite natural, when you see it from the context of it being a real value, how do you cause that kind of mutation, mutation of generating a new value?

So obviously, you can think of many different methods for effecting mutation. One of the most common way to do mutation is to use a kind of a distribution. In your mutation, essentially to get a new value, x_i is your initial value. Again, x_i, this is a real value variable. You would generate the new mutated value x_i prime, by changing the value of x_i, the original one, according to a distribution. A normal distribution from zero to sigma. Normal or Gaussian distribution. So that is quite typical also in your real value representation. This sigma here is your standard deviation. It's kind of like your mutation step size. So there's one way to do it, you choose a random value according to a distribution.

So mutation. In real value, there could be another interesting idea on how we can do a mutation. So we go to, let the algorithm decide, or let the mutation step evolve accordingly. We call this self-adaptive mutation. So the trick is very simple. The step size of your mutation is part of the chromosome. Interesting, right? So you make the step size sigma as part of the chromosome, x_1 to x_n, that is the variables. There's variables in your representation, what you're trying to solve for. So you let that step size be part of the chromosome. So essentially, the step size will evolve with the chromosome.

So in self-adaptive mutation, how many things you need to evolve, or how many things you need to change? The chromosome value, the allele, and then the mutation step size. There are two things you need to operate on. So in the self-adaptive mutation, it is important to note that we must first mutate the sigma. So between the two, x and sigma, you need to mutate the sigma first. So it's important to do the sigma first. Then only we do the allele or the x. Because for both of it, there are two evaluations here. One is the x prime and the sigma prime. They are evaluated. The primary is x prime. The sigma prime is good if the x prime it created is good. So the logic is like this. If you mutate x first, based on the x, you get a sigma. That doesn't mean the sigma is good. Because you measure the fitness, the goodness of it, using x. So therefore, it makes more sense, you would mutate the sigma first. So when you mutate the sigma, then you measure the x, x changes accordingly. If x is good, then it means the sigma is good. It is not true the other way around: if x is good, doesn't mean that your sigma is good. So that order is important in this sense.

And so there are several crossovers. So maybe I let you have a break. Come back at 11:10.

Okay, let's continue. Let me just go back to last week when I talked about the queens. So let's just spend one minute. In last week, I basically mentioned to you C(Q_i) equal to summation of Delta, Delta equal to one if the absolute value of (Q_i minus Q_j) equal to the absolute value of (i minus j), and zero otherwise. I put "not equal", but by right, it should be equal. Or you can change it the other way round. If it's not equal, then this will be zero, and this will be one.

Also, somebody pointed out to me just now, the fitness F equal to one minus C(Q) over some value. In this case, last week, I put 27. But if you count, it should be 28. My mistake. But the important thing is, I think you understand how this is formulated.

Okay, go back. So still talking about real value representation. So we say that we can draw based on the distribution. And we kind of say that we can even put the step size into the chromosome. So this sigma is the step size based on the standard deviation. And also, to take note that if sigma, the step size, is part of the encoding, then the way we do the mutation, we should be particular to mutate sigma first instead of x. So the rationale is, if sigma is good, then it means that your x prime is good, and not the other way around.

What about crossover? So crossover. We are talking about real value here, unlike discrete. Discrete is basically finite values. Now, when you're in your real value representation, your mapping, you're doing from your target, is actually infinite number of possibilities because it's real value.

Now, by the same token, you also know that crossing over, recombination, is a form of creating variation based on the parents. One way to create the kind of variation such that it still inherits part of the characteristics of the parents would be like some kind of interpolation. So intuitively, what we may be looking at as possible recombination would be like operations that create that kind of offspring that takes on something in between both the parents.

So we can consider what we call the arithmetic type of recombination. In the arithmetic type of recombination, we choose a value alpha. Alpha is like a cross point thing. In this arithmetic crossover, we just take z as determined by the alpha: alpha times x_i plus (one minus alpha) times y_i. Alpha is any value that's between zero and one. So how do we come up with this value of alpha? Keep it the same as normal. Or we can make it variable depending on the age of the population. We change alpha accordingly, or we pick it at random every time.

So the type of crossing over involving real value could be a one point single arithmetic crossover. You just cross over involving one point. For example, alpha is 0.5, so you just pick a point, this point here. So 0.5 takes on 0.5 times 0.8. Based on the previous equation, alpha times x_i plus (one minus alpha) times y_i. So you take alpha as 0.5, 0.5 times 0.8 is 0.4, plus (one minus alpha) which is 0.5, 0.5 times 0.2 is 0.1, so you get 0.5. Quite straightforward, a single point.

You could have simple arithmetic crossover, where you break it up, it's multi point. So let's say you have parents x and y, so you just pick a random gene. And then after that, you mix the value. So anything, let's say this is your cutting point here. So anything that's beyond, let's say this point here, like 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and on the bottom 1, 0.2 and 0.3. So 0.5, you take 0.5 times 0.7 is 0.35, and then 0.3 times 0.5 is 0.15. So together, you get 0.5. So quite easy to see. So this is for alpha equal to 0.5.

So many of the researchers or people who design algorithms, it's quite common to use alpha 0.5. Now, that may not necessarily be the case. So we can also choose a different value of alpha. So when you do a practice, how, if alpha is 0.3, what will be the resulting value? So I think quite easily, you can see. If this is 0.3, so you have 0.7. So anything that is after this. So you go alpha 0.3 times 0.3 is 0.09, and then 0.7 times 0.7 is 0.49, and so on. So you should be able to work it out, regardless of the value of alpha.

So we can also apply it to the whole chromosome. Before, we cut it out at a certain point. Now you apply 0.5. We just apply the crossover accordingly across the whole chromosome. So quite easy to see.

Now, I want you to maybe ponder, and I ask you a question. From the crossover, let's say you have two parents. So what are the possible values for the offspring? For example, let's say you have parent 0.3, parent 0.7. What will be the possible values based on the three operations that you've seen so far? What will be the range of value for the offspring, regardless of the value of alpha you choose? The value of the offspring will be anywhere in between, 0.3 to 0.7. In a way that is supposedly the crossover that inherits from both the parents.

Is that necessarily the case? Why not just somewhere near or above? Is there a way to do it such that we encompass greater possibilities in terms of what the offspring can take? This is where we lead to another type of crossover, which is very interesting. We call it the blending crossover.

In the blending crossover, again, we consider two parents, x and y. Let's assume for any of the variables or the gene, the value is such that x_i is less than y_i, to make things a little bit less complicated. So d_i is y_i minus x_i, so it's always positive. So you can see d_i is like the distance between the x and y. So we're going to decide, using that range as a reference. And then we randomly sample. The new value for the crossover, the new value c is between the range [x_i minus alpha d_i, y_i plus alpha d_i]. So again, you should note that this square bracket means the range. So my new value after the crossover, the new value for the offspring, is between this range. This is a random sample.

So because that alpha is a value that you will choose, you can make it adaptive as you go along. So these are the different types of crossover operations that you can see. The blending one is a little bit more interesting. It kind of expands the offspring horizon a little bit more, basing on the distance between the two parents.

So when you put it in perspective, single arithmetic is one point specific. So you can see the possibility of your offspring as just from a set of four possible points, if it's a single point. The simple arithmetic or whole arithmetic, what's the range? Remember, this is your x and y, and I think you're probably convinced that x, y so far based on the arithmetic operation is only between the range of the parents. So the bounding box is this. And the interesting or innovative one would be the blending. So with the blending, this will be the possibility of your offspring.

So the different types of operations that you can see in your crossing over involving real value. So again, you should note, it's dealing with discrete values and real values. Real values is continuous space, like 0.1234, infinite number of possibilities. So the way we deal with discrete and real values has to have that capacity to effect the kind of variations that we want.

Now, in general, nothing to stop us from doing multi parent. So the conventional way is just take two parents and then carry out the recombination. But in GA, strictly speaking, in general, we can extend to even more than two parents. In mathematics or algorithm, anything is possible. So another way of saying it is that we should not restrict our possibility based on what we see in real life. Because our goal in algorithm is to solve problem. As long as we solve problem, we have inspiration from nature, but then in our real algorithm, our implementation should be geared with the main objective of solving the problem itself.

Here, let's say just a simple quick illustration, involving three parents, we call it a simple type-1 crossover. You could take three parents. When you create the offspring, you take the first one, you do a diagonal combination. The first offspring, from the first parent, it inherits this strand. The second, you go along diagonally. Here, you get this, and then the third strand comes from this. And then the second offspring, you start from the second. So you go diagonally. So child number two, you take the first part from the second, and then go diagonal, here. And then finally, the last part comes from, you wrap around to the first. This generalizes the one point crossover. We call this the simple type-1.

Another way is just extend multi parent to the arithmetic type. Remember we did the arithmetic type. So arithmetic crossover, we can also extend it to multi parent recombination.

Now, in recent years, we begin to explore many problems that are discrete in nature, that involve the ordering or the sequencing of things. For example, in your traveling salesman problem. Traveling salesman problem, the problem specifies that you must find a sequence of the salesman visiting each and every city once and only once. What's a good sequence? A good sequence is one that gives you a minimum cost, which the most straightforward way is to measure the distance and so on.

Quite clearly, we see that many problems in real life are of that nature. Your n-queens is another example. So you want to solve an n-queens problem. Well, the sequence and ordering is part of the consideration. So many examples you can think of that fall into this category.

Now, of course, we can use binary coding for this type of problem. Not to say we can't use binary coding. But the issue is, is it the most convenient or efficient way? As you can see from here, there's another alternative, which is a permutation representation.

What is the permutation? Permutation connotes arrangement of things, to arrange it, and usually in chromosomes for our purpose, it will involve integer value. For example, in your n-queens problem or eight queens problem, you have eight integer values one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. A permutation will be any one of those arrangements, such that all the values are different. In your eight queens problem, eight-gene permutation. It's a permutation because each of the values 1 to 8 occurs once and only once. There's a permutation string. Of course, you know why, because we have the constraints of one queen, only one row, and one column. Making it into a permutation becomes very efficient because naturally we already satisfy the constraint of no two queens on one column and no two queens on one row. And then beyond that, all we need is just to solve for the arrangement so it doesn't violate the diagonal conflict.

So always a good example to use is also your traveling salesman problem. So the traveling salesman problem can be an NP-hard problem. We saw from our earlier analysis, to find the optimum for TSP, that can be NP-hard. And usually the objective is to find the minimum distance. Let's see, if for this traveling salesman problem, in order to solve it and there are 30 cities, then one good way is to represent it as integers 1 to 30. Then the order of the genes will represent the sequence of travel. So what you can see is that it is very natural that when we see the traveling salesman problem, it's very natural for us to think of an accommodation of 30 numbers if they are 30 cities.

Of course, along with that also, if it is a permutation, then the way we deal with it in order to create that kind of variation will also have to be a little bit different, or will have to be different. For one, our operation would have to be such that when we operate on it, it should still make it into a permutation. That is the general rule.

So mutation. We know what mutation is all about. So in binary, we saw mutation just as flipping of zero and one. Integer is like also flipping, but then there's a little bit more flexibility or different ways you can do it. Permutation string, how do we do mutation? Mutation always involves only one parent. And because it's a permutation, you can see that this is a permutation, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. So if I were to do a mutation, one simple way is just to do a swap mutation. I take one gene, randomly flip it. Let's say it says flip two to number five. So I flip two to number five. But in doing that, quite clearly, I need to go to where number five is and then flip it to two. And I think it's quite logical you see why, because we still need to maintain that permutation.

Another way to do mutation, we take a value, random. Let's say you have a string of 20, randomly pick two points. Then after that, bring them together. Let's say I randomly pick two and five, and then I bring them together.

There's also another form of mutation. We can also do scramble. So just pick a range of genes and then scramble it. So in this figure, you say two, three, four, five. That's the strand. So I scramble it randomly, then I get three, five, four, two. So you see the effect is to create that kind of randomness that affects the sequence also, not just the value, but also the sequence.

Another form. Inversion. Take one strand, two, three, four, five, and just invert it, as you can see in your inversion. It kind of preserves the adjacency information. It changes the order, but not as much as what you would have done if it is a random type of mutation.

Crossover is a little bit more interesting. There are more options to think about. So essentially crossover, we all know. The simple crossover procedure is to take a crossover site and then do a swap between the string. That is what we know crossover is. So in a permutation string, there are more variations of what we can do in a crossover. And remember that this is a permutation. So the order and the sequencing. So what we want to propagate, for example, from parent to offspring, would be quality that has a good sequence or order. That would be one of the considerations.

So the first idea of crossover, very simple, we choose a crossover strand. Let me show by means of an example. So we decide on a crossover. For example, we want to do crossover involving these four genes here, on the shaded box. So to generate offspring, we take, for example, five, six, seven. Then what about the remaining ones? The remaining ones will be dictated by the order of the second parent. According to the second parent, normally we start creating the offspring from here onwards, on the right hand side. So you look at the second parent. The next one is one. So we pick one here. Then after that, four. But four is already here. So we skip four. Then you wrap around, and say nine, nine is next, nine goes here. Then after that, three, three here and so on.

Quite clearly, what is very clear is that from this crossover operation, the offspring inherits part of this strand, 4, 5, 6, 7 from parent one, and the order inherits the order of the remaining genes on how they should be arranged. Intuitively, we can see what is happening here, what crossover is trying to do. Quite a simple crossover procedure.

The other type of cross, what we call the PMX, partially matched crossover, very commonly used operation of crossover involving permutation string. So as always, there are two parents, P1 and P2. So we choose a segment for crossover. So the steps involved. Choose a random segment from P1, and then starting from the first cross point, look for elements in the segment of P2 that have not been copied. Now, when you choose a segment, there's a chance some of it will be the same. So after you choose a segment, you'll find in your parent two which of the points have not been copied. And then after that, from each of these points, look in the offspring to see what element has been copied in this place. So essentially, you want to find the matching. So that strand there, there's a high chance it may be partially matched. You want to find the matching. Because if it's matched, then you don't have to reproduce it again. And then subsequently, you do a mapping based on parent two, then you decide where the remaining is going to be.

Let's use an example to illustrate. So in this example, we have two parents, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and then 9, 3, 7, 8, 2, 6, 5, 1, 4. So let's say I decide using these two parents, we want to do a crossover involving this strand of four genes. So based on these four genes here. So I take on 4, 5, 6, 7 based on parent one. So parent one will pass on the property based on this substrand, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Now, you would then look at parent two subsequently. You will see that the five and the six in this 4, 5, 6, 7. So let me rewind a little bit. So we go from two. Two is not in {5, 6, 7}. So we go from two to five. And then five goes to here. And then five then goes to seven, and then seven is here. Meaning to say that two will take this place here. And the other one that is not already occurring is eight. Eight is not part of {4, 5, 6, 7}. So you take eight, eight goes to four, and then four goes here. So therefore, it means that eight will be placed here.

So essentially, to put it in perspective, these two substrands here, they are partially matched. So the matching is on six and five. So what is not matched is your eight and two. So you got to find a place for eight and two. So two goes: two to five, and then five to seven, and then it comes here. We'll bring two to the position of seven. And then eight is also not matched. So we're going to bring it out to four. That's step number two.

And step number three, you got to fill up the remaining. So this is still empty. So according to this parent two here, this is one, so I fill up one. And then four is already done, and then you go nine. So nine goes here, and then you go three goes here.

Partially matched comes from the fact that these two substrings, there are some of the genes, they are partially matched. Then you just work on those that are unmatched and see where it goes in the offspring. The final result, after your partially matched crossover, this is the offspring that we get. This is just one offspring.

Now the other offspring that comes about would be based on inheriting 8, 2, 6, 5 from parent two. Let's say I inherit 8, 2, 6, 5 from parent two. What will be the remaining values of the gene for the second offspring? Maybe you take one minute. So you can see from these two substrings. So again, six and five are matched. So the ones that are not matched are four and seven. So you start from the four and seven. Four is not matched. So four goes to eight, and then eight goes to here. So that's your new position of four. And then after that, seven. Where does seven go? Seven goes to five, and then five maps into here, and then after that from five, maps to two, and then two back to here. So that's where your seven should go. And then the remaining will be filled up according to the order of the remaining genes. So you always start on the right hand side beyond the string. So this is what we get as a final outcome. So there are two offspring that can be generated from this partially matched crossover.

So again, the term partially matched. Of course, this string is a little bit short. But of course, you can imagine this could be a problem of, let's say, 50 genes. So the steps may be by far more. I think in your permutation string, your PMX is one of the most commonly used, because it generates a more interesting kind of offspring.

And we can also think of another way. So the concept of another form of crossover comes from the idea of identifying cycles between chromosomes. The chromosomes, of course, the representation, both are based on certain representation. So for example, if it is an integer permutation of queen, both the parents have values from 1 to 8. So in this approach, we identify the cycles of the chromosome.

Of course, we can go through the steps on what to do, but it is much easier to just take a look at the example. So the two chromosomes involved, again, the two parents, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and then 9, 3, 7, 8, 2, 6, 5, 1, 4, use the same strings. So what is a cycle? We can see in these two chromosomes, there are three cycles. The first cycle goes like this: one to nine, and then from nine back to parent one, and then nine goes to four. Four goes to four here, and then four to eight. And then eight maps into the position of parent one, and then eight back to one, and then you return back to the first gene, which is one. So you start out from one, and then you end up in one. That is called a cycle. A cycle is a sequence or mapping that brings it back to the original starting point. So the first cycle involves those genes that are shaded.

Is there another cycle? Well, obviously, there are, because there are some more genes that are not shaded. So you go to number two. So two goes to three, three goes to three here, and then three to seven. Seven maps back to parent one, and then seven to five, and then five to five in parent one, and then five to two, and then back to two. That's another cycle.

So one cycle, two cycle, now only six is left. Is there another cycle? Well, you bet there is. Six and six forms a cycle.

So the whole idea of cycle crossover, it is a crossover operation. So you exchange the cycles. So once you identify the cycles, you just exchange the cycle to generate the two offspring. So the first offspring, you say, the first parent contributes the first cycle. And then the second offspring takes the second cycle of parent one. And then the other one comes from parent two and so on. That is your cycle crossover.

We've seen simple crossover, what we call the order-1 crossover. And then subsequently we progress towards a little more interesting crossover. Then permutation crossover, and this one is a cycle crossover. There may be some problems where cycle crossover will be advantageous. It all depends on the property or the type of problems that we are solving.

Let's take a look at one more involving permutation representations. So when you look at the traveling salesman problem. Quite often, when we talk about crossing over, we tend to work on the value of the allele itself, the value of the gene. And we alter the value of the genes. Now, in this last crossover that I'm going to talk about, it's interesting, it looks at the edge. In the graph, what is an edge? An edge is this connection here. If you represent each gene as a vertex, so this is an edge. This is an interesting operator because it works on the edge itself.

In the crossover or recombination, we first create a table of edges. You create a table of edges. And how many nodes are there? There are nine genes, so you have elements 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. So you have nine elements.

Now you're going to list down the edges. If you look at element number one, the sequence according to this chain is one to two. So you put down two. There's a 1-2 edge. And then, in some problems (the traveling salesman problem is a closed circuit), when you reach the last point, then it comes back to the beginning. So in that sense, from chromosome number one to nine, there's also an edge, so we list it down, nine. And then the second parent, where is one? What are the edges for one in the second parent? Five and four. So you have five and four.

Then you go to element number two. Two is one, three, edges are one and three. And then in the second parent, two, its edges are six and eight. Then you go to three. You have three, two, four, and then seven, nine.

Let's jump a little bit to element number six. This is number six. Then you have five, seven. And then you go to the second parent, 6, 2, 5. This is two, but five is also common in parent one. We put a plus. It occurs in both parents. We use a plus to denote it.

So we have created a table of all the edges, involving the two chromosomes or two parents.

Let's execute the recombination based on edge. So to create the offspring, it is a form of a constructive approach. By constructive, what I mean is that you build up the string one by one. Just constructing a solution. Many algorithms are constructive kind of algorithms. For example, many of your deterministic approaches. The way you look for a solution is you build it up until you get a complete solution. So you start maybe at an initial random point and then after that from there, you build it up until you get a complete solution.

So your whole edge recombination is a form of a construction in that sense. Initially, you pick any initial random starting point, and then set the current element equal to entry. And then the third step, remove all references from the table. So you must maintain a list, a checklist, update the table accordingly. And then decide based on the edges based on some rules.

So once you have a gene, you pick a point, then you want to decide what's the next edge to choose? Because now you're in this node here, you have different edges, you can choose. What are the rules to decide which edge or which path you want to take? The rule goes like this. If there is a common edge, pick that to be the next one. Common edge, you saw in the table, the plus one, there's a common. Otherwise, pick the entry in the list, which itself has the shortest list. Among, let's say you have several options, you target those with the shortest list. And then if they are the same, both have equal number of edges, you just randomly pick one. So when you reach an element that has no more in the list, you just randomly decide on the new element to go to.

So it's clearer to see an illustration. The table we have created for the two chromosomes goes like this. This is the table. And let's say you start from one. You can start from anywhere. There are nine points you can start out. You start from one and from one, the edges for one is two, five, four, and nine. So the first one you choose is one. So your solution now consists of one. It's like your traveling salesman, say, let's say you start with five, then initially your solution here is five. So here, initially, our partial result is only one.

So now we're going to decide. From one, you can go to two, five, four or nine. So you go to number two. How many edges? Three, six, eight. Why not include one? Because one is already taken care of. And then you go to number five. Number five, where's number five, four, six plus. Again, one is not counted because one is already in the solution. And then you go to number four, three, five, nine. And then you go to number nine, three, four, eight.

Here, you have from number one, you go to number two, there are three edges, three, six, eight. And then if you go to number five, there are four and six plus. And then you go to number four, there are three, five, nine, three edges. And then to number nine, three, four, eight, three edges. So which one is the shortest? According to our rule, we choose the shortest. So the shortest is number five, four and six plus, so you choose number five. You go to, now your solution is one and five. So you strike off number five from your table. Up to this point, you can strike off one and five.

And then you have from five, four and six. Four and six are not here yet. So you go to four, six. Is there a common? No. So four and six, 4-6 plus. So you go for six plus. And then from six, you have two and seven. Five is already taken care of. So you go to two. You have three, six, eight, and then seven, you have three, six, eight. Both are the same. So you random. You can randomly choose between the two.

So quite simple, the idea. So again, I emphasize, different crossovers have different attributes of what it's trying to emphasize or what it's trying to pass on. So the last one, the edge recombination, if you see from the context of a graph problem like a traveling salesman problem, it is trying to effect changes on the recombination based on the edge properties of the chromosomes.

So we have done four representations. And that is quite complete. Now, let's do one more. There's another type of representation. Many problems are very elegantly described or represented as tree. So it's a kind of problem where you want to find a property of a tree that is the most optimized or gives you the best representation. This tree could be like a program. So if you represent it as a tree, that means that you're evolving a program. Or it could be a structure, or it could be a finite state machine or whatever it may be. So representation as tree is also very elegant.

Now, if let's say we consider tree representation. Let's say we want to represent this formula here, this arithmetic formula, two pi plus blah, blah, blah, and this equation. We can represent this logical formula or program. These are possibilities of what a tree can be used for.

We all know the rule of mathematics. The parentheses have higher precedence order. Accordingly, this equation here. At the root of it, you have your plus. And then there is this product here, the two and the pi. And then the other one on the right hand side of your plus will be this remaining formula.

So the tree has a node and then the node has leaves. So at the end of it, there's a terminal. You can see in your tree representation in this case, the terminals represent the values. So the nodes, the non-terminals, that will be the functions or operators. So this is an illustration on how you may represent the tree.

Same thing. Let's say the left hand side implies the right hand side. This implication, so you can build a tree to represent this. Your algorithm could be evolving a logical structure. Again, the terminals represent the symbols or the values. I think by now you get the idea of the tree representation.

So let's say you have this procedure here, so we can actually draw a tree to represent this. So when we deal with values, it's quite natural when we create the kind of variation of operation, you would expect the operation to change the value. For example, one to three or zero to one, 1.2 to 2.8, we're dealing with values. Now, in this case, we are dealing with, literally, the structure. So therefore, your operations must be such that it manipulates or causes variations in the tree structures. So that's what you are trying to do.

So your tree, normally, you have a terminal set. Terminal, I told you, the values and so on, and also the function set. Essentially what you have to think about in your tree here, you got to define this set of values and also the functions.

Now, when you go to your actual implementation. So when you mutate or when you do crossover, you are mutating or crossing over the tree itself. So mutation. In this case, when you mutate, you mutate, let's say, a part of the tree, a point in the tree. And then from there, you create another tree. For example, as a result of this mutation, you get another tree like this. So here we mutate, and the mutation of it makes this into, let's say, a terminal value. So we get a result of a mutation, a new tree structure. And of course, the parameters are quite similar, we have a mutation probability and so on.

So the whole idea of evolving, there's this area, what we call the genetic programming. So genetic programming, very likely you'll be looking at tree.

Now, quickly about the recombination. So recombination is about exchanging between substrings earlier on. In this case, what are you exchanging? So you have parents, you're just exchanging the subtree. So a quick illustration as in this figure here. So you take two parents and then you take a subtree and then do an exchange. So there's the whole idea of recombination.

And I think this is probably a good point to stop. So today we did pretty good. We cover all the representation. We see the repertoire of the operations involving mutation and crossover for the different types of representation.

Some of you are asking me, does the quiz cover next week's lecture? So I haven't set the quiz yet, so I'll make it such that it won't include the next week's lecture. So next week, I may finish up with a little bit more, and then I will maybe use some time to look at some of the previous questions, just to give you a little bit of flavor of what kind of questions, more on the exam type of questions. So I will see you in class. And then after that, in the evening at 9:30, I'll see you for the quiz. See you next week.
