Okay,  let  me  do  a  sound  test. Can  I  check  if  you  can  hear  me from  the  back  right  at  the  back. Am  I  audible  all  the way  to  the  end?  Can  you  hear  me? Okay? I  I  also  want  to  check  because my  voice  is  not  in  the  best  of  shape,  right? So  when  you  just  recover  from a  sore  throat  or  whatever  throat  infection, so  you  have  to  be  cautious  about, like,  exerting  too  much  of  the  vocal  cot. Okay.  So  I  hopefully  the  noise and  the  signal  to noise  ratio  is  acceptable such  that  you  can  hear. I  put  a  game  too  high. Then  some  of  the  words  may  muffle, and  it  may  not  be  so  clear. Okay.  Let's  do  our  best  and  see  if  we  can run  through  what  we  are supposed  to  do  today,  right? This  is  the  first  day  of  the  semester or  even  the  academic  year. And  I  hope  you  are  in  the  right  class. This  is  EE  6407. Right?  My  name  is  Lim  Lim  Mel, with  the  school  of  TE, I  put  down  my  office  number and  my  e  mail,  right? Anytime  any  short  queries do  it's  okay  to  drop  me  an  e  mail, but  there's  no  guarantee that  a  reply  will  be  very  prompt, especially  when  this  you tend  to  overlook  when you  are  serve  with  e  mails. Okay.  So  as  a  menu, drop  an  e  mail and  you  feel  that  it's  urgent  enough, you  know,  you  can  drop  a  reminder,  okay. So  office,  you  may also  stop  by  to talk  to  me  if  you  need  to,  right. But  I  I  presume  what  I've  seen  is that  most  of  the  materials  are actually  quite  okay,  quite  manageable. I  hope  it  won't  be  too  texting. Okay. So  the  title  of  this  is genetic  algorithms and  machine  learning,  right? So  I  wonder  if  you  the  question  that  pops  up, you  know,  you  say, this  course  is  about  machine  learning,  right? But  how  come  so  we,  you  know, suddenly  the  genetic  algorithms pop  up  together  in  the  title. Is  it  just  to  fill  up  the  hours  or  what? Well,  you'll  be  surprised  or  maybe  not. Right?  They  are actually  very  closely  intertwined. Okay?  Of  course,  machine  learning, you're  going  to  cover  a  lot of  it  when  prop  mole  takes  over. But  genetic  algorithms  as  is  very closely  associated  to  machine  learning  also. I  many  problems,  in  machine  learning  can  be formulated  as  a  GA  problem or  genetic  algorithm  problem. So  along  the  way,  you  will  see that  some  of  the  terms  we're  going  to  use. We  say  is  genetic  algorithm, but  sometimes  very  often, you  say  evolutionary  algorithm or  evolutionary  computing. So  these  terms,  although  strictly  speaking, there  are  some  there  are differences  in  the  terms when  you  use  it,  right? But  they  are  not  important. What  is  important  is  that  we  are specifically  looking at  a  class  of  techniques, right,  that  is  inspired  by  nature,  right? A  biology.  Okay?  How  is  that? Well,  as  we  go  along, I  think  it  will  become  very  apparent  as  to how  that  inspiration  from  nature,  right? Is  put  into  practice. In  a  computing  mode or  computing  environment  to solve  practical  problems.  All  right. So  although  my  part  is  only  four  weeks, I  presume  through  these  three  or  four  weeks, it  should  be  enough  to  give  you an  understanding  such  that  you  can even  use  it  to deal  with  problems  that are  relevant  to  your  research. Okay?  Now,  you  may  ask where  if  you  need  a  reference  book,  right? If  you  look  in  this  small  icon  here,  okay? This  is  the  book  where  all  the materials  I  got  the so  called  the  lecture  materials,  right? I  was  fortunate  because  he's a  good  friend  of  mine, so  I  was  able  to  use it  quite  freely  in  a  way. Okay  okay? Uh,  Okay  will  be natural  to  ask  how are  you  going  to  be  assessed  or  evaluated? No,  since  the  first  class, I  think  it  makes  sense  to  have a  good  understanding  of the  board  of  assessment. So  there  are  essentially  two  parts, continuous  assessment,  right? Those  are  assessment. That's  done  throughout  the  course, which  consisted  of  40%. And  then  the  final  exam is  towards  the  end  of  it, which  takes  up  60%. So  that  60%  is  just  towards  the  end,  right? The  whole  subject  combined. Of  course,  I  think  the  weightage is  higher  60%. So  you  have  to  go  through all  the  materials  in  order to  be  able  to  do  reasonably  well  in  the  exam. Okay  okay.  But  having  said  that continuous  assessment is  also  very,  very  important. It  constitute  a  significant  portion such  that  quite  certainly  it  will make  a  difference  in  the  grades. Right.  And  I  certainly  hope  that the  continuous  assessment  will  serve  to help  to  boost  up your  grades  rather  than to  try  and  pull  you  down. Right?  Because  quite  often  also, you  may  also  need  help,  right? The  pending  your  results or  how  you  do  in  your  final  exam. Okay?  So  continuous  assessment,  40  40%. So  during  my  four  weeks. All  right. I  will  give  you  one  quiz. Okay.  As  far  as  continuous  assessment is  concerned.  Only  one  quiz. No  homework  All  right. No  homework  no  assessment on  your  attendance  and  so on  attendance,  you  decide. As  far  as  I'm  concerned, to  assess  you  on  a  continuous  assessment, there's  only  one,  which  is  a  quiz. So  the  quiz  is  a  closed  book  quiz  in a  control  environment  written.  All  right. And  he  will  be  held  on the  last  week  number  four. That's  the  end  of  my  part. So  Week  number  four,  we  run  a  quiz. And  then  after  that,  the  next  star, Professor  Malco  take  over for  the  remaining  of  the  subjects. All  right.  That's  as far  as  the  assessment  goes. Quite  straightforward. I  would  say.  All  right. Now,  no  homework,  again,  I  emphasize. Some  of  you  will  be  wondering, where's  my  homework,  you  know,  right? Many  may  like  homework, which  is  not  wrong  because  homework is  a  way  to  practice also  to  test  your  understanding.  All  right. But  the  nature  of  my  study, I  think  I  would  like  to  put it  in  such  a  way  that  it  is very  is  actually  you  can  relate  to  it, right  if  you  really  understand  the  scope or  the  context  of  what  is  covered,  right? You  can  relate  to  it  because  it is  actually  quite  easily relatable  to  real  life  situation  also. And  I  try  to  make  it  that  way by  giving  in  throwing in  examples  now  and  then,  practical  examples. And  s  Let's  dive into  the  topic  that  is  of interest  to  us  or  what  we  want  to  do. That's  a  genetic  algorithm. But  here,  I  call  it  evolutionary  computing. You'd  be  surprised  to  know, genetic  algorithm  is  actually a  specific  technique  within the  umbrella  of  evolutionary  computing. That  means  that  evolutionary  computing  is a  more  general  terms  more  generic, which  covers  genetic  algorithm.  T. But  then  it's  quite  strange. Whenever  we  talk  about  such  kind of  tech  we  always  say  genetic  algorithm. Rather  strange  in  that  way. But  then  we  understand the  development  of  the  volutory  approach, then  you  will  realize  that there's  a  good  reason  why  this  is  so. It  has  to  do  with the  popularity  of  the  techniques. When  enough  people  use  it, everybody  start  using  the  GA  part of  the  evolutionary  computing, then  it  dominates  and  the  people  say, Oh,  I'm  using  a  GA  method. Okay.  So  that  is  all. But  as  far  as  I'm  concerned, I  will  use  terms  like  evolutionary  algorithm, evolutionary  computing,  genetic  algorithm, all  in  a  very  interchangeable  manner. But  they  are  taken  to  mean  the  same  thing. All  right?  What  does  it  mean  to  evolve? When  you  say  evolution  to  evolve  means what  to  change  to  change. All  right.  Maybe  today today,  I'll  shaft,  right? Two  days  later,  you  see  I'm  full of  my  full  of  hair  on  my  chin  so. Is  it  correct  to  say  I've evolved?  Probably  not,  right? So  it's  not  wrong  to  say  to  change, but  it's  not  that  kind  of  change  that you  talk  about  every  day. When  you  say  evolution, the  implication  is  that  it  is  a  change. You  know,  the  time  scale is  obviously  different. All  right.  So  the  context  of what  we're  talking  about evolution  would  be,  for  example, in  nature,  how  species  evolve, making  gradual  adjustment  with  time. All  right.  So  there's  a  context  of  evolution. Don't  think  Simplist  as  say, Oh,  just  change,  it's  not  that. It's  beyond  that.  Now, computing,  of  course,  you  know. So  how  we  actually  use  the  metaphor  in evolution  and  put  it into  a  computational  approach, such  that  we  can  solve problems,  useful  problems. So  that's  the  realm  of  what  we are  trying  to  do  in  evolutionary  computing. Now. Essentially,  when you  are  professionals,  right? Or  you're  going  to  be  a  professional, or  you're  really  a  professional,  right? So  what  do  you  do?  What  are  you  trying  to  do? Or  what  are  you  usually  tasked  to  do? To  deal  with  Problems,  Correct? All  right?  If  there's no  problem,  there's  nothing  for  you  to  do. So  the  whole  crux  of  all  this  is that  you're  solving  problems. Real  problems.  Okay. So  when  you  solve  problems,  obviously, you  look  for  technique  and  then  such  that the  problem  can  be  handled effectively.  All  right. Now,  before  you  do  that, All  right,  I  think  it  makes  a  lot  of  sense. If  you  have  some  understanding on  the  nature  or the  characteristics  of  the  problem. What  type  of  problem  are  you  dealing  with? How  do  we  characterize how  do  we  so  called  classify? Here  we're  going  to  attempt to  do  a  classification  of  the  types  of problems  to  be  solved?  All  right. So  we're  going  to  attempt  to  put  use four  different  characteristics  to so  called  characterize  the  problems,  right? So  number  one,  we're  going  to  look at  the  black  box  model, right?  Black  box  model. Black  Box,  everybody  knows. When  you  say  something  is  a  black  box, what  does  it  mean? Is  it  in  a  black  box  model? Right?  What  does  that  black  box  ne  mean? Well,  essentially  what  it means  is  this,  right? I  have  a  system,  right? Usually,  I  have  input  and  output, and  I  have  a  technique  to  solve  it, that  that  transform  the  input to  the  output,  right? Now,  inside  this  technique or  what  we  call  the  model, right?  We  don't  really  know. It's  a  black  box.  All  right. And  we  don't  care  but  we  don't  care, because  it  does  a  job. All  right.  For  any  input, it  gives  us  the  desired  output. So  there's  a  black  box  we  are  talking  about. All  right. Now,  when  we  classify the  problem  according  to  the  black  box, the  whole  crux  of  it  is we  break  it  down  into  three  parts. There's  the  input  with  respect  to  the  input, the  model  itself,  and  then  the  output. Now,  another  way  to  look at  problems  would  be  in  terms of  looking  at  it  as  a  search  search  problem. The  word  search  means  to  look  for  something. In  this  case,  you  look  for  a  solution,  right? So  when  you're  doing a  search,  what  are  you  interested  in? You'll  be  interested  in how  big  the  problem  is. How  many  possibilities  am  I  talking  about? Because  you  are  looking  for  a  solution. So  it  makes  sense  to  try  and  get a  grasp  of  how  big? How  complex,  how  big  is  a  such  space? A.  So  there's  another  perspective you  can  look  at in  terms  of  classifying  the  problem. The  next  one  we  we  can  look  at would  be  like  to  see  from  the  angle  of  it, from  the  optimization  angle, and  then  from  a  constraints satisfaction  angle. Optimization,  we  all  know, don't  we  to  optimize. To  optimize  means  to  come  up  with  a  solution, that  uses  whatever  resources that  you  have  efficiently. That's  optimization  that  you're trying  to  optimize.  Okay. So  you  go  from  point  A  to  point  B. You're  trying  to  optimize the  path  or  the  rot. That  means  that  you're  trying  to  find  a  path. Such  that  it  take gives  you  the  shortest  time, right  to  go  from  point  A  to  point  B. That  quite  clearly  there  is some  objective  you're  trying to  achieve  this  optimization. Now  constraints  is  a  little  bit different.  What  is  the  constraint? Constraint  is  a  requirement. It  is  a  condition. All  right? Constraint  satisfaction means  this  condition  is  satisfied. What  is  a  requirement is  satisfied?  All  right. So  your  problem  usually  come  with  many, many  so  called  requirements  or  constraints. All  right?  So  when  you  see  it as  a  constraint  satisfaction, you  will  look  at  it  as  a  problem,  right? How  much  you  can  satisfy  all  the  constraints? I'm  not  talking  about  five constraints  or  ten  constraints. The  problem  could  be  like thousands  or  millions  of  constraints. All  right.  So  that  will  be  from a  constraints  satis  second  angle. Now,  the  final  approach on  classifying  a  problem. You  probably  have  heard  of  the  term  MP, especially  if  you  have some  programming  background. MNP  refers  to  a  non  deterministic  polynomal. Essentially  layman's  term,  we  want  to  know. Or  understand  how  difficult the  problem  is,  right? So  in  the  last  approach, if  you  want  to  look  at  how difficult  is  the  problem. You  want  to  classify  according  to the  difficultnes  of  the  problem. All  right?  Now,  in  particular, this  kind  of  so  called  classification  is  very useful  in  the  type of  problems  that  are  discrete  in  nature. So  later  on,  I'll give  a  little  bit  explanation between  what  we  mean. When  we  say  it's  a  discrete  kind  of  problem. The  opposite  of  discrete, of  course,  is  continuous,  right? I  mean,  just  a  quick  note to  say  continuous  problem means  that  your  variables are  continuous  values. Discrete  means  that  the  solution  actually has  take  on  discrete  values like  indiges  for  example, one  thing  that  strikes your  mind  very  clearly  is, if  it  is  a  continuous, the  space  is  infinite. Is  discrete.  Discrete  is theoretically  finite. Theoretically  finite,  right? If  it  is  discrete.  Okay. But  then  there  may  be  a  trap. It  could  be  discrete,  it's theoretically  finite,  but  yet, it  can  present  itself  as  one  of the  most  difficult  problem  to  solve. Okay. So  in  particular, our  NP  approach  of  classification, probably  more  applicable  to so  called  discrete  type  of  problems. So  hopefully  by  the  end  of  the  day, you  have a  clear  understanding  or  clear  picture on  the  motivation  or the  rationale  for  these  different  ways of  classifying  or  problems. Right? So  that's  what  we  want  to  do. First  understand  the  problems, right  from  the  perspective  from  the  problems, how  do  we  classify  and  categorize  it. Okay. Okay.  The  first  one is  black  box  model,  right? W  we  want  to  classify  it  by  thinking  of problems  of  the  system as  just  a  black  box  model. So  three  parts.  All  right? In  a  prob  problem  solving  system.  The  parts. You  have  input  output, and  then  you  have  the  model, technique  for  solving  it. All  right. So  one  of  it  is  missing, meaning  one  of  the  be the  input  model  or  the  output, when  one  of  it  is  missing,  okay? I  presents  itself  as  one  type  of  problem. All  right.  So  let's  jump  straight  into  it. So  first  scenario,  let's  say if  you  don't  have  the  input, or  put  it  another  way. In  this  problem  here, you're  trying  to  find  the  best  input. All  right? That  meets certain  objective  requirement.  Okay? So  this  kind  of  problem when  you're  looking  for  the  input, this  is  what  we call  the  optimization  problem. So  optimization  problem  is  usually  driven by  a  certain  objective of  what  you  are  trying  to  optimize. So  you're  looking  for  best  input such  that  that  objective  is  the  best, right  or  most  optimal. So  better  to  have  some  examples  to  look  at. Right? Everybody  knows  time  tableing. You  all  have  a  timetable, timetable  for  University  Call  Center, or  even  a  hospital  rostering  or  manpower. Many,  many  other  scenarios. You  can  see  time  tableing as  being  applicable. Let  go  generally about  University  time  tableing. Usually  in  timetableing, what  are  you  trying  to  optimize? What  can  you  think  of? You  know,  as  the  objective  No. When  you  talk  about  optimization,  right? One  clear  notion  that strikes  you  would  be  that,  you  know. Usually  there  is  limited  right? In  terms  of  the  resources.  It's  limited. Okay?  If  it  is  unlimited, there's  nothing  to  do,  actually. Isn't  it?  Right?  Usually  there's  limited. Then  because  it's  limited, then  you  got  to  try  and  so call  come  up  with  a  solution,  right? That  makes  efficient  use of  limited  resources. What  is  limited  in  timetable? For  example,  in  the  University  time  ting. U  are  in  OT.  How  many  MTs  are  there? Right?  At  this  point  in  time, I'm  having  a  hard  time  finding a  LD  for  a  quiz, you  know,  So  it's  limited. Right? The  physical  resources  is is  usually  one  of  the  clear  limitation. What  are  the  other  so called  limitations  that  you  can  think  of? The  number  of  hours? How  many  hours  do  you  have? Within  one  day,  okay, you  have  24  hours, but  even  within  the  24  hours, maybe  only  8  hours  are  usable  by the  rest  of  it  probably is  your  time  and  so  on. Okay.  So  maybe  that's from  a  student's  perspective. Now,  what  about  let's  say  faculty? You  only  have  a  certain  number of  faculty  headcount.  All  right. So  there's  also  another resource  that  is  limited. So  the  point  I'm  trying  to  make  is  that  it  is clearly  a  form  of  optimization.  All  right. So  when  we  talk  about optimization  z,  you  know, what  is  it  that  we  are  optimizing?  Okay. Design  sis. GA  can  be  a  very  powerful tool  in  doing  design. Right? So  you  can  pose  a  design  problem as  an  optimization  problem. And  you'd  be  surprised. The  amazing  results. You  can  use  it  like  for  example  to  design, say  filters,  for  example. All  right?  Or  shape  of  a  car. Okay.  Many  different  design  problems. And  the  others  are classical  kind  of  problems, examples  like  a  traveling  salesman  problem. Given  n  number  of  cities, find  a  path  for the  salesman  to  visit each  and  every  city  once and  only  once,  right? With  the  minimum  cost. Classical  computer  science  kind  of  problem. The  other  one  more  like a  game  bro  the  eight  queens. Eight  queens  was  introduced  to solve  or  to  illustrate the  backtracking  algorithm. So  when  first  presented, eight  Queens  itself  was  a  challenge. But  these  days,  right, eight  Queens  is  is not  not  a  problem  at  all,  right? It's  very  easy.  Okay. Okay. Back  to  time  tling  again,  right. Let's  emphasize, talk  a  little  bit  more about  the  time  tableing,  right? So  in  particular, the  University  time  tableing, Usually,  such  space  is  huge. There  are  many,  many  different  possibilities. So  quite  clearly  is an  enormously  big  such  space. So  what  we  also  want  is  good  time  table. All  right,  good  time  table. What  is  a  good  time  table? Well,  good  time  table, at  least  it  must  fulfill all  the  requirements,  right? The  requirements  in  terms  of  resources, that  is  non  negotiable  type. If  I  have  X  number  of  rooms,  that's  it. I  I  can  only  use  x  number  of  rooms. You  cannot  say  can  I  have  x  p? X  is  X. So  that  would  be  the  so called  the  requirement. So  those  are  good  time  tables,  right? No. But  there's  another  type  of  requirement, especially  in  time  tableling,  okay? So  there  are  some  requirements, as  I  just  said,  the  requirements are  non  negotiable.  Must  do. Must  have. There's  another  type  of  requirement,  right? There's  what  we  call  the  soft  requirement of  soft  constraints  kind  of  a  requirement. Soft  means  that  when  you  solve  it, right,  you'll  be  better if  you  can  fulfill  that  requirement. But  if  you  cannot, the  solution  is  still  a  feasible  solution. That's  a  soft  requirement.  Right? For  example,  if  let's say  you  schedule  my  teaching  hours. All  right.  If  out  of  the  8  hours, every  hours  is  one right  after  another,  right? On  paper,  it  looks  like  a  workable. Timetable  was  a. But  you  know  there's  a  preferred they  are  so  called  to have  continuously  right  8  hours of  teaching,  that's  no  good. But  it  is  a  constraint,  but it  is  a  soft  constraint. But  really,  really  no  choice, maybe  on  a  certain  day  okay  you  know. Let's  run  it  that  way, you  know,  there  will  be  soft  constraints. So  collectively, when  you  look  at  the  time  table, what  is  a  good  time  table? Of  course,  those  that satisfy  the  art  constraints, the  non  negotiable  type,  right? Now,  the  goodness  of  what  the timetable  You  also  have  to think  about  the  other so  called  the  soft  type  of  requirements. So  how  much  can  you  satisfy? So  that  will  be  a  way  to determine  how  good  timetable  is. So  be  clear  about  the  nature  of  many  problems where  there  are  constraints that  are  or  requirements that  are  art  requirements, and  they  are  also  what  we call  the  soft  requirements. So  again,  soft  requirements or  soft  constraints, If  it's  not  satisfied, it's  still  a  feasible  solution. Although  not  a  preferred  solution, but  it's  a  feasible  solution. And  the  optimization,  right? Let's  say  you  you  want  to design  mechanical  structure  for  a  satellite. So  you  can  use  GA  to solve  this  as  an  optimization  problem. All  right.  So  whenever you  solve  it  as  a  optimization  problem. There's  usually  some  objective. That  drives  you.  That  drives the  optimization.  All  right. Ob  in  this  case, you  want  to  maximize  vibration  isolation. A  good  structure  will  had  minimal  vibration. That's  essentially  what  we  are  saying  here. Okay. So  if  you  are  using  a  evolutionary  approach, you'll  be  evolving  the different  design  structures,  right? You  evolve  different  design  structure and  each  structure, how  good,  how  bad,  you check  the  vibration,  right? So  to  check  the  vibration, either,  you  have  the  physics  model. Okay  to  determine  the  vibration or  you  use  a  estimation, you  know,  or  you  have a  simple  model  just to  estimate  the  vibration. Okay.  So  therefore,  you must  have  a  way  to  estimate  how  good  it  is. So  that  will  constitute  the  fitness. Fitness  is  closely  associated to  the  objective  value, the  objective  of  what  you're trying  to  optimize,  right? So  that  fitness  will be  the  vibration  resistance. Now,  what  is  the  by  far? The  most  interesting  thing  about  GA  in design  is  this  is  what  we call  the  evolutionary  creativity. What  does  it  mean  when  we say  you  are  very  creative? What  are  we  say? Or  if  you  are  not creative,  what's  the  tendency? B  we  have  a  problem. Say  this  guy  is  creative as  compared  to  another  guy  he's  not  creative. What  would  you  expect  from somebody  who  is  creative and  somebody  who  is  not  creative? I  would  like  to  think  that,  you  know, for  being  non  creative,  right? Whatever  solution  that  you  come  up, Quite  likely  you  may  meet the  requirements,  right? But  it  won't  be  a  very  interesting  solution. It  will  be  very  closely or  similar  to  what  is  already  known. You  get  my  point,  right? If  it's  not  creative. Chances  are  is  quite  predictable, I  will  work,  I  will fulfill  the  condition  or  the  objective. That  is  not  creative, but  it  solves  the  problem.  Right? If  there's  really  creativity,  if  you  say,  k, this  person  is  creative, then  what  you  may  expect  from him  is  that  he  will  come  up  with  a  solution. The  solution  that  he  comes up  with  has  a  high  chance  of  being very  different  from  what known  or  what  other  people  have  done. A  that's  creativity. All  right. So  if  you  think  about GA  or  evolutionary  algorithm, when  it  evolves  the  structure, does  it  really  care about  how  the  structure  look  like? It  doesn't  really  care. Because  all  he's  doing is  driven  by  that  objective. That  whatever  structure  that  comes up  with  will  try and  minimize  the  vibration. That's  all  he  cares  about. Now,  because  of  that  randomness in  generating  the  solution, GA  is  known  to be  what  we  call  creative  in  that  sense. It  comes  out  with a  very  interesting  solution. There  is  evolutionary  creativity. When  you  do  fashion  design, you  design  fashions,  right? You're  a  fashion  designer. I  think  chances  are  a  lot of  your  new  designs, maybe  quite  close  to  what  was  before, what  has  already  been  done,  right? Okay.  If  you  explore  a  little  bit, he,  why  not  use  the  evolutionary  approach. A  right. So  in  that  sense,  k. Evolutionary  approach can  be  a  good  candidate, you  know,  to  evolve  fashion,  right? Based  on  the  fashion  sense  or  them,  you  know? You  look  around,  there  are  many  pros that  has  been  many  design  problems, that  uses  GA  to  do  it. Like  even  in  evolutionary,  A  RT, right,  or  jewelry,  designing  jewelry, or  any  other  structures. So  that  is  how  you  how  GA  comes  into  play. In  so  called  evolving  design  structures. Again,  just  to  summarize  this  point  here. Why  is  it  an  optimization  problem  is an  optimization  problem  because we  formulate  it  as  an  optimization  problem, because  in  optimizing  it, our  sole  objective  is  to minimize  the  vibration  of  the  structure. Okay? So  optimization  always  an  objective that  drives  the  optimization. Simple  example,  the  e  queen  sprawl. Everybody  can  relate  to if  you  know  what  a  chest  mode or  you  know  what  a  queen  is. Just  in  case  you haven't  touched  chest  before. Well,  a  queen  is  a  chest,  right? That  commands  vertically, vertically,  horizontally. For  example,  a  queen commands  vertically, horizontally,  diagonally. And  diagonally  both  ways. So  that's  what  a  queen  commands. So  if  you  put two  queens  on  the  same  diagonal or  the  same  column, that  means  that  they  are  in a  mutually  attacking  positions,  right. So  the  problem  in the  eight  queen  optimization is  to  place all  the  eight  queens  such that  no  two  queens  attack  each  other. All  right. So  first  formulated  to  solve  or  to demonstrate  what  we  call the  backtracking  algorithms.  Okay. So  just  as  a  quick  test, do  you  see  this  configuration as  mutually  known  attacking? Yes,  no. This  configuration  that  is  shown. Do  you  see  any  attacking  pas? Looks  like  there  isn't  any or  looks  like  there  may  be  some  attacking. So  we're  going  to  use the  en  Queens  problem  to illustrate  a  lot  of  the  concepts  or  ideas. In  particular,  I  will  show  you  how  to do  the  formulation  of  the  en  Queens  problem. When  we  say  to  formulate, means  that  to  put  it  in a  form  where  you  can  actually  code  it, you  know,  in  terms of  so  you  can  write  equations, you  know,  to  define  the  fitness on  how  you  would  calculate. All  right.  So  you  look  at  this  here. Quite  clearly,  you  can see  this  screen  and  this  screen. They  are  in  a  mutually  attacking  position. Beyond  that,  not  sure that  there's  another  one  here. So  those  will  be the  mutually  attacking  queens. So  of  course,  it  simply says  that  this  configuration  does  not satisfy  the  eight  non  attacking  eight  queens. Okay.  So  there's  optimization. So  let's  consider  the  middle  portion  that  is the  model  itself  is  missing.  All  right. So  So  in  in the  class  que  according  to  the  black  box, if  you  if  your  problem  is  such that  you  are  looking  for  the  model,  right? You're  looking  for  the  model. Then  that  is  a  modeling  problem,  right? Many  of  your  problem  in machine  learning  are  modeling  problem. That  is  quite  clearly  so  because  I know  many  of  you  have  done  uro  networks. You  always  look  for  training  samples. Isn't  it? Your  training  samples  say, this  is  the  data,  the  input, and  this  expected  output. So  that  expected  output can  be  data  that  you  accumulate, or  you  could  be  the  one  labeling  it. I  especially  in  classification,  you  say, this  data,  this  input here  is  certain  class  class  one. The  next  input  class  two, so  you  do  the  tedious  task  of  labeling. All  right. And  so  the  obviously  in your  neural  network,  problem  solving,  right? So  what  are  you  looking  for? You're  looking  for  the  model.  All  right? So  the  problem  of  training  a  neural  network, that  is  a  modeling  problem. So  you're  looking  for  a  model. And  this  model  after  you  know  you find  you  solve  it. Is  actually  is  just  a  its  interconnection between  the  different  neurons  and  so  on. And  how  that  neurons connect  the  vis  you  don't  really  care. So  in  that  sense  is  a  black  So  here  you  see, this  is  what  machine  learning. So  many  problems  in  modeling, especially  you  come  from  the  GA  angle,  right? Especially  when  you  are  very  strong  in  GA, quite  often  you  can  formulate  many  of the  problems  out  there as  a  GA  problem  or  GA  optimization. All  right. So  Modeling  problem. For  example,  evolutionary  machine  learning. Now  think  about  it. GA  is  optimization,  right? Correct?  GA  is  optimization. Optimization,  usually you  have  a  certain  objective. You  want  to  try  and  optimize  or minimize  or  maximize  whatever  it  may  be. There's  optimization. Let's  say  you  are  training  a  neural  network? In  training  a  neural  network, you  do  iterations  until  you  find  a  set  of weights  that  gives  you  the  so called  the  correct  association between  the  input  and  output. That's  training  a  neural  network. What  if  you  look  at  it as  a  optimization  problem. How  would  you  approach  problem? Well,  if  that  newer  nek  training  is an  optimization  problem.  All  right. So  essentially  what  you  will  be  doing  is that  you  will  find  a  set  of  weights,  right? So  in  your  GA, you  have  many  samples  of  this  weights,  right? And  then  you  test  each  set  of  weights. And  then  based  on  each  set  of  weeks, you  test  or  you measure  or  you  determine  the  error or  inaccuracy  between  the  desired  output and  the  output  that  you  get,  right? So  when  you  optimize, you  try  to  optimize  such  that the  error  is  minimized. Right.  So  in  next  sense, you  have  presented  the  problem  of  training the  neural  network  as  a  optimization  problem. Predicting  stop  exchange, You  know  what  is  time  series  data? Your  stock  data  every  day, and  the  equities  that  are  traded. So  those  are  your  time  series  data. So  in  your  time  series  data, let's  say  you  want  to  build  a model  to  do  prediction. Prediction  means,  I  want  to  predict  what  is the  likely  valuation  of price  the  next  day.  All  right. So  the  basis  of  my  prediction  is  based on  historical  data  or  past  data. All  right. So  I  built  a  model. I  build  a  prediction  model. So  this  model,  I can  solve  it  or  I  can present  it  as  optimization  prom. So  I'll  build  it  could  be  rules, it  could  be  like  even  the  neural  network. So  I'll  build  a  model such  that  the  error  based  on  the  past  data, the  error  between  the  expected  output,  right, and  the  error  based  on  the  model  that  I have  is  minimized.  All  right. Once  you  have  the  model, then  it  becomes  a  prediction  too  for  you to  predict  future  events that  is  going  to  occur. Like  your  voice  control systems  in  smart  homes. So  for  example,  certain  device  or appliance  is  acts  by  voice. You  can  train  it  or  you  can  build  a  model  to recognize  by  commands  on  of  reset,  do. Okay.  Many  examples  you  can  think  of. Let's  look at  one  more  example  in  terms  of  modeling, loan  applicant  credibility,  right? This  is  quite  practical. So  when  you  go  to  a  bank, you  ask  for  a  loan. Then  you  the  bank  would  want  to  know, right  your  profile, I  understand  your  profile. And  like  based  on  your  earning, a  whether  you  own  a  house, blah,  blah,  blah,  and  so  on. So  so  then  based  on  that, then  the  bank  decides whether  to  loan  you  or  not. Now,  what  if  the  bank wants  to  replace  it  with  a  program. All  right.  So  that  program based  on  past  historical  data  or  event. All  right.  So  based on  past  historical  data  or event  in  terms  of  loan  being  disbursed. So  this  past  data  can  be  used  to build  a  model  for the  system  for  the  bank,  right? So  when  you  build  a  model  You  know, you  must  recognize  the  fact  that  that  model, the  representation  of  it  can  be  anything. It  could  be  just  a  set  of  rules,  right? A  set  of  rules,  or  it  could be  a  neural  network. It  could  be  some  equations or  close  form  representations on  how  you  associate  the  input and  output,  and  so  on. Okay. So  optimization, when  you  don't  have  the  input, is  a  modeling  problem  when  you  don't have  the  so  called  the  model. It  is  a  simulation  problem. When  we  have  the  input, we  have  the  model,  the  output, we  don't  know.  All  right. So  we  can  consider some  examples  where this  scenario  may  be  applicable. So  you  you  have  the  input, you  have  the  model,  right? So  you  will  be  posing the  scenario  where  you  say, what  if  my  input  is  this, you  know,  what  kind  of  output  will  I  get? So  based  based  on  a  certain  model,  is  it  a. Let's  say  if  I  give  you  this  model,  right? If  I  give  you  this  input, what  could  be  the  expected  output? Well,  you  will  only  know  the  output. If  you  simulate  according to  the  parameters  that's  given. Then  you  would  ask,  Okay, what  kind  of  systems  situations would  require  you  to do  such  kind  of  stimulation? All  right. So  here  are  some  examples,  right? Particularly  in  a  very  dynamic  environments. Evolutionary  economics. Artificial  life.  You  have a  new  tax  system?  All  right. Let's  say  I  want  to see  the  effect  of  tax  incentive, how  it  can  affect  the  population. A. So  what  do  I  do?  Assumly. I  assume  that  whatever  tax  incentive and  what  kind  of  effect  is  going  to  result? And  then  eventually  I see  what  kind  of  output  that  comes  out  of  it. In  artificial  life,  Weather  forecast  system. What  if  the  humidity change  in  certain  region, you  know,  what's  going  to  happen? How  is  going  to  affect  on so  called  a  wide  scale,  right? The  the  the  wind, you  know,  or  the  weather, in  general,  the  weather.  Okay? And  impact  analysis  on  new  tech  systems. Okay?  So  the  point  to make  is  very  simple,  right? So  there  are  many  problems  in  real  life, right,  where  you  cannot build  a  physical  model  to  validate. Right?  You  cannot  build a  physical  model  to  validate. All  right. You  can  simulate  to predict  or  estimate  the  behavior, but  it's  not  possible  to build  a  physical  model. All  right.  Okay.  Perhaps  the  next  example next  couple  of  examples  may  illustrate. You  can  book  on  artificial  societies. You  can  use  you can  build  artificial  societies. Which  is  going  to  evolve? Now,  how  is  going  to  evolve? Well,  it  depends  on  what your  objective  is,  what  to  do. For  example,  you  can  simulate  trade, economic  competition,  and  so  on. So  in  this  artificial  society  here. All  right. One  of  the  clear  objective  would  be, you're  trying  to  calibrate  a  model. A  right.  So  you  calibrate  a  model,  right? Because  your  objective  is  that  you  want desirable  characteristics that  comes  out  of  it. So  we  can  use  models  to  optimize the  strategies  and  the  policies,  right? Like  in  policy  making  a  decision  making. Okay. So  the  forces  that  play  survival. Stronger  strong  ones  gobble up  the  weak  ones,  right? Big  fish,  small  fish  kind  of  scenario. So  chi  fur  society. Assuming  you  simulate  it. Can  you  build  a  physical  system? No. All  right. Say  from  a  bi  biological  perspective, say  we  know  inces  prevention keeps  evolution  from  rapid  degeneration. This  is  unknown.  That  is  known. Okay?  So,  you  know, there's  no  physical  system. Multi  parent  reproduction  makes evolution  effective.  All  right? You  know,  when  we  talk  about  reproduction, what  is  the  Obviously, when  we  talk  about  reproduction,  right? There's  this  inheritance  in  terms of  traits  or  characters. All  right?  The  children  will inherit  characteristics  of  the  parents. So  logic  logic  will  tell  you that  What  about  Multi  parent. That  sounds  like  it's  going  to work  even  better,  isn't  it? You  understand  my  point. Okay?  So  it  should  work  better. All  right? Well,  it  never  exists  in  real  life, because  it  can  never  exist. Right? Doesn't  exist.  But  you  can  do  simulation. Right? You  can  do  simulation  to see  if  this  is indeed  so  or  is  it  possibly  so. Okay?  No  picture  to  go  with  that.  Okay. Let's  let's  do  a  few  more  minutes before  we  all  take  a  break. Okay.  So  far,  you've  seen that  in  simulation,  right? We  look  at  one  input  and  then  we we  see  what  kind  of  output comes  out  of  it.  Right. So  this  is  very  different from  your  optimization  and  modeling. So  in  optimization  and  modeling, you  are  searching  for the  many  p  so  called  models, right  or  searching  for  many, many  possibilities. Okay.  So  basically, your  optimization  and  modeling  search through,  huge  possibilities,  right? So  the  search  space, if  you  search  through  many, many  possibilities,  you'll  be interesting  to  know,  right? What  the  possibilities  are, what  we  call  the  search  space. So  if  you  look  at  a  problem a  problem  solving  as  a  search  problem, you'll  be  interested  in  the  search  space. Right? Because  if  you  know  about  the  search  space, you'll  have understanding  about  the  search  space, then  that  becomes  a  so  called  information, right,  on  what  you  will  use  in building  a  technique  to  solve  the  problem. So  when  we  talk  about  search  space,  right? A  good  example  is  like  when you  have  a  traveling  salesman  problem, tensity  traveling  salesman  problem, how  many  possible  combinations  are  there? You  can  literally  know, how  many  possibilities. So  there's  a  search  space. So  when  we  do  these  kind  of classifications  to  see  from the  perspective  of  it  being a  search  place.  All  right. Essentially.  So  if  we  see  it as  from  the  perspective  of  it being  a  search  problem,  right? Then  we'll  see  we are  essentially  thinking  about so  called  the  space  search  space as  well  as  the  problem  solver. B  in  the  search  space, then  we  think  about  how  do the  technique  or  suitable  techniques to  deal  with  the  problem. Right?  So  we  black  box, search,  and  we  can  also  consider. From  the  perspective  of  it  being optimization  as  well as  constraint  satisfaction. Optimization.  We  all  know. You  optimize  certain  metric or  what  we  call  the  objective. Usually  a  objective  function. What  is  an  objective  function? A  way  of  assigning  a  value  to a  possible  solution  that reflects  its  quality. There's  a  objective  function. There's  a  purpose  of  objective  function. In  other  words,  how  good  is  this  solution? So  that  is  what  the  objective  function  does. Wells  constraint.  Constraint  is  different. Constraint  is  binary  evaluation telling  whether  a  given requirement  holds  or  not. Take  note  binary  evaluation. So  if  I  ask  you,  okay, this  is  a  constraint,  right? Is  it  satisfied?  Usually,  the  answer is  yes,  no,  binary. It  cannot  be  half satisfied,  half  not  satisfied. Right? Yes? Or  no.  Okay?  That  is  what  a  constraint  is. Okay.  So  problems. Many  practical  real  life  problems involve  constraints. Quite  likely  they  involve  constraints. Right?  Constraints  are those  requirements  usually imposed  by  real  life  situation  or  scenario. If  we  put  the  two  together, So  your  constraints,  do  we  have  constraints? Right? We  put  it  consolidate  these two  into  a  simple  table  like  this. So  does  your  problem  have  any  constraints? Right?  Or  does  it  involve  constraints? Yes.  Oh  no. Optimization.  All  right. Optimization  is  usually  characterized by  objective  function.  All  right. So  that's  your  problem? That's  an  objective  function? Yes.  Oh  no. If  your  problem  involves constraints  and it  involves  objective  function, then  it  is  called  optimization  problem. Constrain  optimization  problem. So  the  next  scenario. Does  your  problem  have  constraints? Yes. Does  it  have  an  objective  function? All  right?  The  answer  is  no.  Okay. So  no  objective  function. So  it's  not  optimization,  make  sense,  right? So  we  call  this  problem  here. Constraint  Satisfaction  problem. So  Constraint  satisfaction,  basically, it  is  a  problem  that  is  considered  to  solve satisfy  all  the  constraints. There's  a  constraint  satisfaction. And  then  the  next  one, do  you  have  constraints? No.  You  have  objective  function?  Yes. Then  there  is  what  we call  a  free  optimization  problem. Free  optimization  problem  is very  easy  to  illustrate. For  example,  I  say  this  is 200  city  traveling  salesman  problem. All  right? Find  me  the  minimum  distance to  visit  all  the  200  city. That's  a  free  optimization  problem. Right?  You're  driven  solely  by the  objective  of  trying to  minimize  the  distance. Okay.  So  there's  free  optimization. No  no  constraints,  right?  Okay. We  will  look  into  examples, they  are  using  the  en  queens  problem  and see  how  we  can  put it  as  whether it's  constraint  optimization  problem, free  optimization  problem or  constraint  satisfaction  problem. So  if  you  look  at  the  en  Queens  problem, where  do  the  examples  fit,  and  so  on. How  can  we  formulate the  en  Qin's  problem  into  FOP,  CSP,  and  COP? All  right. So  we  won't  do  it  now  later. I  will  when  we  come  back. We  want  to  take  a  break,  right? So  when  we  come  back, I'll  give  you  a  few  examples or  like  a  poll  in  a  way  to  poll you  and  see  make you  consider  or  think  a  little  bit, right,  how  you  will  see  it  as  a  CSP, COP,  or  HOP  so  on. All  right.  So  I  suggest  let's  take  a  break. And  then  when  we  come  back,  we  do a  simple  question  polling  kind  of  situation. So  we  we  we  come  back  around  8:00,  right? Yes. A  Okay. We  are  back  to continue  from  where  we  left  off,  right? So  we  were  talking  about the  class  equations  in terms  of  optimization versus  constraint  satisfaction. Okay.  So  this  table summarizes  when  you  put the  two  together,  right, how  based  on  so  called whether  you  based  on  the objective  function  and  the  constraints, then  you  can  derive  like three  different  sub  categorizations,  right? Now,  let's  think  of  the  quens  from  All  right. Eight  queens  problem  is  a  problem where  you  have  egg  by  egg  chest  board, and  then  you  are  trying  to  place the  egg  queens  in  such that  they  are  in  a  non  attacking  manner. Right?  Now,  of  course, the  problem  can  be  generalized  towards much  larger  value  of much  more  than  egg,  Okay? How  big  can  it  go? Well,  100,  500,  you  know, as  big  as  you  want  it  to  be. Okay. So  of  course,  as  the  problem  increase, then  the  size  increase, then  it  becomes  more complicated  or  difficult  to  find  a  solution. Now,  every  configuration  of  end  queens, every  end  queen  problem  usually  have more  than  one  possible  configurations where  all  the  queens  are Are  placed  in  a  mutually non  attacking  positions. So  herein,  I  want  you  to  look  at  minute. Okay.  I  have  a  QR  code  here. All  right.  I  would  like you  to  this  QR  code  here. Answer  for  me  a  few  simple  questions pertaining  to  the  queens. So  you  spend  a  few  minutes to  look  through  it, read  the  question  carefully, and  based  on  your  understanding on  optimization as  well  as  constraint  satisfaction. Give  your  opinion  or judge  what  where  it  belongs  to. So  don't  worry  about  being right  or  wrong  because  all  we're interested  is  to  use  it  as a  platform  to  analyze  further, you  know,  how  we  will  do  categorization. Y. Hey. Okay.  We  have  197  res. A  200. Okay.  Maybe  there  are about  198  people  in  here.  All  right? Oh.  We  passed  200  bingo. So  let's  do  some  analysis on  the  questions  that were  presented  in  this  short  hole  here. So  there  are  four  questions  here. So  this  is  all  pertaining to  the  N  Queens  problem,  right? So  you  can  see  the  nature of  the  different  formulation  of  the  n  Queens. So  let's  take  a  look  at  the  first  questions and  see  what  we  can  get  out  of  it. So  the  first  first  question says  simply  find  a  configuration  of n  queens  with  at  least  98%  of the  total  number  of  queens  placed in  non  attacking  positions. So  very  simple,  right? So  for  example,  100  queens,  Okay. What  I  want. What  I  want  is at  least  98  queens  non  attacking. If  it's  200,  I  want at  least  196  Queens,  non  attacking. All  right.  That's  what  the  question  says. So  you  would  take  note. You  would  do  well  to  take  note. If  you  read  the  question very  carefully.  All  right. It  says,  find  a  configuration  of  n  queens. All  right.  Find  a  configuration  of  n  queens. W  at  least  98%. Non  attacking  positions.  All  right. So  what  does  that  tell  you? If  I  I  run  the  algorithm  and  say, out  of  100  queens,  I  only  got  92  queens. Is  that  acceptable?  No,  right? Because  the  question  says,  you  know, find  eight  configuration, right  with  at  least  98%. So  meaning  that  you  must have  at  least  let's  say  100, you  must  have  at  least  98 of  the  queens  in  non  attacking. So  that  means  that  you're  dealing  with one  Constraints? All  right?  Constraints. So  amazingly,  I  think  many of  you  hit  it  on  the  nail? Yeah?  It's  a  constrain  satisfaction  problem. All  right?  So  it's a  constraint  satisfaction  problem. But  let's  say,  is  there a  ground  to  believe  or to  think  that  it  could be  constrained  optimization  problem. Is  there  any  ground  for  it? Perhaps  there  is.  All  right. Perhaps  you  see  this  problem as  not  really  a  solvable  problem, for  example,  N  is  huge. All  right. N  is  huge,  like  1  million,  for  example. So  you  see  it  as  may  not  be  solvable. Not  to  say  not  solve  may  not  be solvable  based  on the  algorithm  that  you  have. So  if  that's  what you  believe,  then  what  you  will  do, you  will  try  and  solve  it such  that  you  get the  best  solution,  isn't  it? Wouldn't  that  be  what  you  would  do,  right? So  you  just  try  and  get  the  best  solution, it  may  not  meet  the  98%,  right?  Okay? So  in  that  context  here, you  can  see  it  possibly  as a  constraint  optimization  problem. But  taking  the  problem  description  as  it is  it  is  a  constraint  satisfaction  problem. All  right. But,  for  example,  if you  describe  to  me  and  say,  Yeah, assuming  is  huge  and may  not  be  solvable,  right. So  therefore,  may  not be  able  to  find  even  the  98%. Then  that  would  be  ground  to  see as  a  constraint  optimization,  right? They  okay? Mainly  more  likely  to be  CSP,  constraint  satisfaction. It's  definitely  not  a  free optimization  problem. Take  a  look  at  the  second  one. Maximize  the  number  of non  attacking  queens  when placing  n  queens  on  n  by  n  e  pot. About  50%, 48.5%  says  it's  free  optimization  problem. Rightfully  so,  right? You  want  to  maximize. Maximize  the  number  of  non  attacks because  your  problem  solving  is driven  primarily  by  the  objective of  trying  to  maximize,  right? Then  if  somebody  say, you  know,  I  mean, it's  only  like  eight  queens,  you  know. What's  the  to  optimize? Well,  we  talk  about  in  general,  right. So  you  want  to  maximize  for  example  is all  let's  say  if  it's  100  queen. You  know  the  maximum  in  this  case, you  know  the  ultimate objective  you  want  to  achieve. So  which  is  100. But  if  you  don't  achieve  the  100, it  will  be  the  maximum  value  you  achieve right  based  on  the  computing  time that  you  have  accorded  to  it,  right? That  would  be  a  So  free  optimization would  fit  the  bill  quite  well  in  this  case. And  the  third  one. So  assume  you  start  out with  random  configuration  of  queens,  right? You  have  a  random  configuration  of  queens. You  are  allowed  only  one  move  for  each  queen. And  the  extent  of  the  movement  of each  queen  should  be  minimized. So  you're  asked  to  make small  movement  in  the  position  of  the  queen? So  you  asked  to reposition  the  end  queen such  that  the  total  number  of steps  involved  is  minimum  and  the  number  of non  conflicting  queens  is  maximized. So  what  is  the  so  called  objective? Is  there  a  certain  objective we  are  trying  to  optimize  here? So  here  it  says  the  extent  of the  movement  of  each  queen  should  be  minimum. For  example,  if  there  are  ten  queens, yeah,  the  total  movement, the  number  of  steps  of  movement  of all  the  ten  queens  should  be  minimized. So  that's  what  you  want  to  minimize. So  I  therefore,  in  that  case, it  is  presents  itself  as  more  optimization. But  on  the  other  hand,  there's also  another  objective, which  is  to  satisfy  the  constraints. So  all  these  constraints are  to  have  a  non  conflicting. Configuration  of  all  the  queens,  right? So  essentially  you  have  two  objectives  here. One  is  to  satisfy  that  constraints in  terms  of  the  non  attacking. And  then  the  other  is  to try  and  minimize  the  number  of  steps. Right?  Now,  this  kind  of  scenario, right,  you  may  think  is  very  hypothetical. But  in  essence,  in  many  problem  solving, this  is  actually  quite practical,  quite  normal. So  we  call  this  this  kind  of  situation. It's  similar  to  a  local  search. Local  search,  meaning  that you  search  within  the  neighborhood. Right?  You  want  another  solution, hopefully  better  than  what  you  have. All  right.  But  with minimum  number  of  adjustment, that's  what  you  are  seeking. So  practically  example, you  deploying  your  delivery  man,  right? You  already  have  a  plan. You  know,  he  goes  out  or  maybe  a  few of  them  go  out  and  then  deliver  accordingly. Right?  Suddenly,  there's  a  road  closure. Then  you  have  to  make  adjustments,  isn't  it? Are  you  going  to  do  a  whole re  planning?  Obviously  not. All  right.  So  what  you  will do  is  that  you  make  minor  adjustment. So  we  call  that  minor  adjustment, searching  for  the  next  local  optimum. All  right.  So  in  the  context  of  optimization, that  is  exactly  the  kind  of  scenario  that is  presented  in  this  en queen  tier  that  we're  talking  about. Okay. So  eight  close  to  90% says  constraint  optimization,  right,  right? There's  objective  of  so  called optimizing  the  number  of  steps  as  well as  so  called  the  constraints of  the  non  attacking  queens. The  last  scenario,  position of  three  queens  have  been  fixed on  n  by  n chest  board  in  a  non  attacking  manner. Imagine  you  have  a  chest  board. N  queens.  Three  of  the  queens  fixed, meaning  to  say  it  must  be  in  this  position. Whatever  solution  you  come  up, the  three  queens  remain  fixed a  certain  position.  All  right. You  are  required  to  maximize  the  number  of non  attacking  queens  when the  remaining  n  minus  three  queens  are subsequently  placed  on  the  chessboard. Here's  a  catch.  Let's  say,  n  is  10,000. N  is  10,000,  right? So  the  n  could  be the  number  of  clients  or  customers,  right? Three  customers  are special  special  treatment. So  you  fix  them. Now  you  can  only  shift  the  remaining, you  know,  9,973  97. You  get  my  picture.  Okay. So  so  you  are  required to  shift  the  remaining. All  right.  So  here the  question  says.  All  right. So  you  are  required to  if  you  read  the  question  very  carefully, you  are  required  to  maximize the  number  of  non  attacking  queens. All  right.  Maximize  the  number of  non  attacking  queens,  right? All  you  do  is  just  maximize. All  right.  So  of  course, the  final  ultimate  would  be  like  the  total, all  the  queens  are  non  attacking,  right? Okay.  But  what  did  I  tell  you? I  need  a  solution  within  like  maybe, you  know,  1  microsecond  of computing  time  or  or 100  iterations,  and  so  on. Subject  to  such  kind  of  requirement. Okay.  So  you  don't  have  the  luxury  of cranking  and  so  on  to  find  the  best  solution. So  you're  required  to  maximize the  number  of  non  attacking  queens  when the  remaining  n  minus  three  queens are  subsequently  placed  on  the  chatbard. What  do  you  think?  Now  that you  see  the  scenario? Would  you  change  your  mind? Well,  about  80% says  is  constraint  optimization. After  hearing  what  I  say, Any  possibility  of  you  changing  your  mind? We  say  maximize. Maximize.  All  right. So  would  you  now  be  inclined  to say  it's  free  optimization? Okay.  Could  very  much  be  so. It's  free  optimization.  All  right? Okay  So  not  bad among  the  four  problems,  right? It  is  kind  of  neil  it  on  the  tree. The  last  one  maybe  your  perception of  it,  you  need  to  consider. Right?  Ale  bit  differently. Okay. So  I  hope  that  illustrates the  idea  of  looking  at  it  from constraint  satisfaction and  optimizes  optimization. Okay,  let's  move  back  to Okay. Move  back  to  our  slides. And  the  next  categorization  we  look  at? Let's  consider  the  Pines  the complexity  from  the  perspective or  complexity  of  the  problem. So  far,  we  only  look at  classifying  the  problem. We  haven't  really,  focused  on  the  problems. Isn't  it,  right?  So  that's what  we  have  been  looking  at. So  in  this  classification  here, we  need  the  so  called  the  classification, we  need  the  properties  of the  problem  solved  itself. All  right. So  what  we're  trying  to  do,  right, is  to  have  a  sense  on  how difficult  the  problem  is.  All  right. Both  not  just  a  problem, but  also  for  aspect  of  the  problems  of. This  form  of  classfent, is  very  applicable  in combinator  optimization  type  of  problems. Combinator  problem  problems  where  what  you're interested  in  is  to  seek combination  arrangements  of  things. Back  to  the  point,  I  talked  about  continuous from  and  discrete  problems. Continuous  problems,  usually,  you  deal  with real  value  variables  or parameters  that  you  are  trying  to  optimize. Your  solution  will  be  real  values. Well,  as  in  your  discrete  problems, right  discrete  problems. There  is  the  solution,  the  values, the  parameter  values  are actually  discrete,  for  example, integers,  right,  you  know, any  arrangement  of so  called  integer  values,  and  so  on. Based  on  a  set  of  integer  values  and  so  on. Now,  a  lot  of the  problems  deals  with  a  situation  where you're  trying  to  find  an  arrangement of  the  discrete  elements. So  you're  trying  to  find  a  combination. All  right. So  we  call  that  combinatoral  optimization. So  NP. NP  is  very  applicable  to  describe. Combinatorial  type  of  problems, combinator  discrete  problems. So  N  p  of  course  stands for  non  deterministic  polynomial. Right?  Polynomial,  we  know  what  it  is. We  know  what  the  polynomal  is. For  example,  a  polynomal  or  degree  three. So  it's  like  A  X  three plus  ax  square  and  so  on. So  that's  polynomal  or  degree. Non  deterministic. Non  deterministic. So  it  means  that  you  cannot determine  for  sure  what  that  polynomial  is. It's  like  you  asked  me,  okay, I  know  this  is  a  NP  problem,  right? Then  you  asked  me,  is  there  a polynomial  bound  for  this  problem. Then  my  answer  to  you  would be  no,  or  I  don't  know. Be  it's  non  determin  NP. So  that's  the  nature  problem. So  henceforth,  it  is  non  deterministic. So  before  we  go  on  to the  classifications  of  the  problem. In  many  of  these  problems, we  normally  have  so called  the  problem  size,  right? The  problem  size  has  to  do  with the  the  dimensionality of  the  problem  at  hand. Usually  the  number  of different  values  of  the  variables. For  example,  your  traveling salesman  problem,  how  many  cities? Ten  cities,  30  cities,  right. So  that  30  corresponds  to a  dimension  a  higher  dimension,  right? O  which  correlates  to  the  size, you  know,  of  the  problem in  terms  of  the  search  space  and  so  on. Then  the  run  time. So  the  number  of  operations that  algorithm  takes  to  terminate. Right?  How  long  does  it  take? Well,  we  usually  consider the  worst  case  as a  function  of  the  problem  size. Characterization  in  terms  of  life. N  n  could  be  in  the  number of  cities  as  in the  traveling  salesman  problem. Is  is  a  polynomial  super  polynomal, exponential? So  if  it  is  polynomial, or  it  is  nice,  that's  not  difficult. Right?  It  may  be  a  huge  polynomial. At  least  we  know  for  sure,  it's  a  polynomal. Then  we  can  plan  our  resources  accordingly. Okay.  Then  the  next  notion, the  next  point,  right? Concept  would  be  problem  reduction. So  this  has  to  do  with mapping  mapping  of  a  problem from  one  form  to  another  problem. Example,  there  are  some  problems. When  you  solve  the  problems  as  it  is. It  may  be  more complicated  as  compared  to  when  you  do the  inverse  of  the  problem and  then  solve  the  so called  the  corresponding  inverse of  the  problem,  right. So  so  mapping.  All  right. Mapping  from  one  problem, one  form  to  another. Okay. So  based  on  this  here, we  he  for,  put  together  four  different  class. One  is  a  class.  Based  on  the  MP  ness, say  the  class  P.  Class P  is  a  class  of  problems where  algorithm  can  solve the  problem  in  polynomial  time. P  is  a  polynomial. Which  means  to  say  the worst  case  running  time  for pro  size  n  is  characterized  by  F  n, which  is  a  polynomial. Right?  Very  easy  prong. Right?  For  example, everybody  knows  about  sorting,  right? To  sort  a  list  of items  or  even  names,  for  example, You  have  ten  names  compared  to 10  million  names,  not  an  issue. They  are  fast  efficient  algorithm. This  kind  of  problem  they  are, so  called  polynomially  bounded. Worst  case  is  squared, which  is  manageable  is  polynomal. Problems  that  polynomial  is not  what  we  are  so  concerned  with. They  are  easy  to  deal  with. Those  would  be  the  class  P  where  you  can characterize  using  a  polynomial  formula. What  we  are  more  of  concern to  us  would  be  the  class  that  belongs to  the  class  P,  the  deterministic  polynomial. Basically  nondeterministic  polynomial  refers to  problem  can  be  solved. An  solution  can  be verified  with  polynomal  time by  some  other  algorithm. Right?  Obviously,  P  is  a  easy  case. P  is  just  you  can  put p  as  just  a  subgroup  under  your  NP. Among  all  the  NP,  there  are  some  that are  very  simple  is  P.  A. But  many  of  those  are  what  we  call  the  NP. All  right.  So  what  constitute  NP? We  say  the  problem  is  NP. If  I  give  you  a  solution. You  can  verify.  You  can  verify it  in  polynomal  time.  That's  a  NP. Again,  P  is  non  detenive  polyomal. I  don't  know  what  the  polynomal  is. Right?  Okay. So  we  say  is  just  a  general  class  NP when  the  solution  can be  verified  in  polynomal  time. Now,  after  your  class  NP, there's  another  class, that's  called  NP  complete. NP  complete. Problem  belongs  to  class  NP. It  is  still  a  class  of NP  problems.  All  right. But  what  makes  it  completes  NP. But  what  would  make  it characteristic  would  make  it  complete? Well,  Problem  belongs  to  class  NP, and  any  other  problem  in  nP  can be  reduced  to  this  problem by  an  algorithm  running  in  polynomial  time. So  what  are  we  looking  at we  are  looking  at  the  mapping,  right? For  example,  you  know, you  you  are  tasked  to  solve  a  problem,  okay? That  was  described  to  you,  right? Now,  because  you  are  optimization  expert, so  you  already  solve  many  problems, right,  You  have  many  algorithms. That  you  have  that you  have  developed  over  time,  right? So  being  an  expert, you  probably  have  many  of these  algorithms  already  at  your  disposal. Then  somebody  comes  along  and  say, this  is  a  problem  to  solve. And  of  course  it  looks like  a  strain  your  new  problem. Then  you  analyze  the  problem. Of  course,  you  can  straightaway  build an  algorithm  to  solve that  problem  that's  given  to  you. But  what  if  What  if  tough  analysis. You  see  this  problem  is  similar  to one  of  the  problem  that  you already  solved  before,  right? You  need  to  so  called  convert  or  transform. This  problem  such  that it  is  solvable  by the  algorithm  that  you  have. You're  mapping  it  from  one  to  another. The  condition  that  makes  it  complete  is this  mapping  must  run  in  polynomal  time. That's  very  logical.  Even  the  mapping. It's  not  polynomal  time. Then  you  might  as  well  just solve  that  problem  as  it  is. So  to  make  it  into  MP  complete, say  the  transformation  of mapping  from  that  problem  that is  given  to  us  to  another  problem,  right? That  that  must  be  in  polynomal  time. So  that  is  a  MP  complete. Quite  often,  in  real  life  problem  solving, that's  what  we  do.  All  right. So  through  the  many  pieces of  I've  done  for  industry, a  lot  of  time  they  come  to  me,  you  know, say,  this  is  the  problem, the  nature  of  the  problem,  and  so  on. On  my  part,  I  will  try  and  see, take  advantage  of  the  algorithms  that  I  have. Okay.  So  I  will  try  and  map whatever  the  problem  there  is  and  then map  it  into  the  form  where  I  can  use the  algorithms,  my  disposal. Okay.  The  last  part. NP  hard  hardest. Problem  is  at  least  as  hard  as any  other  problem  in  NP  complete,  right? Okay. As  hard  as  any  other  problem  in  NP  complete. But  solution  cannot  necessarily be  verified  within  polynomial  time. I  give  you  a  solution. This  will  be  NP  hot. If  I  throw  you  a  solution.  Right? Can  you  verify  a  solution? How  long  does  it  take  to  verify? If  you  cannot  verify  in  polynomal  time, then  that  makes  it  M  p  hard. And  there's  the  hardest. Good  illustration  example, that  will  make  the  point  very  clear. Your  traveling  salesman  problem. Let's  say  n  equal  to  100. Let's  top  n  equal  to  100. There  is  a  new  problem. Nobody  ever  solved  it  before. I  say,  find  mit optimum  she  distance  for  this  hundred  city. Why  is  that  it? Not  just  in  terms  of  the  number  of possibilities,  right? So  of  course,  the number  of  possible  distance. It  is  hard  to  the  extent of  NP  hard.  All  right. Remember,  I  say  find met  a  minimum  distance  or optimum  distance  or  she  the  best  distance, So  find  met  the  optimum  distance. How  do  you  know  what's  the  optimum? What's  the  minimum?  You  don't  know. When  you're  running  the  algorithm, so  you  have  a  solution. Then  you  need  to  ask,  is  this  the  minimum? How  do  you  verify  is  minimum? To  scenario. One  is  that  somebody  tells  you that  there's  this  solution that's  better  than  yours. Then  you  know  straight  away, you  can  prove  that's  not  the  minimum. Then  you  run  your  algorithm  again. Another  scenario  is  that you  have  no  reference, nobody  knows  what  or you  don't  have  a  better  solution  around  you. The  only  way  for  you  to prove  that  it  is not  the  minimum  is  to  do  what. H  to  explore  all  the  possibilities. Remember  N  100.  So  that  takes  a  long. The  worst  case  is  that  when it's  close  to  the  optimum, to  prove  that  this is  not  the  optimum,  you  have  to  run. Literally  search  through  the  whole  space and  find  that  there's none  other  better  than  this. Then  only  you  prove  that  this  is  the  minimum. No.  Such  is  the  nature  of  P. There  are  many  NP  art  problems available  in  practical  scenario. So  many  a  time,  right? We  many  problems. We  don't  really  know  what  the  optimum. And  in  a  practical  sense, we  don't  really  try  and  solve for  the  optimum.  Right? Our  optimality  is always  qualified  with  respect to  things  like  how  much  time  does it  take  for  me  to  get  a  solution. If  it  takes  me  2  hours, I  may  get  a  very  good  solution, but  it's  not  practically  viable  approach. All  right. So  that  is  so  when  we  talk  about  optimality, we  must  have  that  so  called understanding  in  terms  of what  it  means,  right? I  optimality  in  a  wide  sense,  okay? So  this  f  classification  here,  okay? If  you  want  to  depict  it  in  a  diagram,  right? So  there's  no  need to  there's  not  much  convincing  need. P  is  different  from  MP  art,  right? I  think  we  can  all  accept  that. The  problem  is  P  and  P.  All  right, MP  art.  It's  definitely  different. Okay. But  What  is  not  known, right  is  whether  P is  different  from  P.  Right? You  remember,  I  talk  about  MPP  art is  so called  literally  unsolvable  problem,  right. The  hardest  prom. Now,  but  what's  not  known  whether P  is  different  from  P  t.  Right? Nobody  has  ever  proven  yet. Okay.  Whether  P  is  NP  or  not. So  if  you  believe  that  if we  assume  that  p  could  be  equal  to  n  p. Then  the  way  we  draw our  representation  of the  problem  map  will  be  such. Since  P  equal  to  NP, then  you  have  the  NP  that sends  out  on  its  own. So  if  you  assume  P  is  going  to  P. But  what  is  more likely  what  is  more  likely  to  be  what is  generally  accepted  that P  is  not  equal  to  n  p. All  right?  Is  generally accepted  because  there  has  been  no  proof  yet, say  P  could  possibly  be  equal  to  n  p. But  you  never  know,  maybe  through quantum  computing  and  maybe the  scenario  may  change  or  whatever. We  say  P  is  not  equal  to  NP. Therefore,  the  way  we  represent it  would  be  you  have your  general  NP  problems here  and  then  your  MP  art  problems. There's  no  curse  So you  have  your  general  MP  MP  prongs, and  then  you  have  your  MP  art  prong,  right? So  overlap,  there  will  be  MP  complete. So  Among  the  MNP, there's  a  so  called  the  easy  kind, which  is  the  P. So  this  is  a  likely  representation of  what  more  realistic  scenario. All  right.  So  Q. How  do  we  deal  with  this  MP  art? Very  tough.  It's  very  tough  problem. So  how  do  we  deal  with  it? But  reality  many  problems  out  there are  P.  That's  reality. We  solve  many  of  the  problem  or  we deal  with  many  of  the  problem,  right? Quite  certainly,  it  won't  be  a  very deterministic  en exhaustive  enumerative  approach. It  won't  work.  Therefore,  that's why  you  study  genetic  algorithms. We  use  approximation  algorithms and  method  heuristics. Genetic  algorithm  is  a  meto  heuristics. Right?  It's  a  heuristic, but  not  exactly  heuristic. The  word  mato  means  it is  heuristics  about  heuristic. Or  in  this  case,  meta heuristic  like  the  heuristics  that exists  right  or  based  on the  metaphor  or  the  rules that  occur  in  nature, like  in  evolution,  right? Okay.  That  brings  us  to  a  point  where, you  know,  why  all  this, you  know,  why  we  need  all  this. So  to  make  you  be able  to  relate  to  how  this  can  be  useful. The  classic  classical  book by  Gary  and  Johnson, talks  about  complexity  and  intractability. So  start  of  the  book  with  this  scenario, which  I  thought  is  very nice  to  use  to  illustrate  why the  understanding  of  the  classification we  are  talking  about  is  useful. So  in  the  book, the  starting  part  of  starting before  they  dwell  into  the  theory  behind  it. So  they  put  forward  this  scenario, which  I  thought  is  nice. So  Imagine  one  day your  boss  calls  you  into his  office  and  confides sack  the  company  is  about  to  enter the  highly  competitive  and sth  market  and  sth. Don't  ask  me  what  and  Snatch  is,  right? For  this  reason,  a  good  method is  needed  for  determining whether  or  not  any  given  set  of specifications  for a  new  bender  stage  component  can  be  met. Right.  We  need a  good  method  or  good  technique. If  so,  construct  to construct  a  design  that  meets  them,  right? Now,  because  you  are,  you  know, you  are  the  big  guy  in  terms  of designing  algorithm  or  problem  solving. So  you're  the  big  guy,  right. So  therefore,  you'll  call upon  your  boss  and  say, L,  this  is  the  situation  we  are  in. This  is  very  important. Right?  And  you  confident  you  walk  in. To  the  office.  So  after understanding  your  problem, you  did  a  lot  of  background  work and  all  through  piles  of  paper, scratching  on  papers, you  know,  and  so  on,  you  know, you  realize  that  it's  basically  quite  futile, you  know,  to  find an  algorithm  to  for  the  problem. Okay. So  but  unfortunately,  you need  to  walk  in  and  tell  your  boss, how  do  you  break  it  down  to  your  boss? Well,  three  scenarios  are offered  in  your  in  the  book. So  you  walk  into  the  to your  boss  office  and  say, you  know,  I  just  cannot find  an  efficient  algorithm,  right? I  guess  I'm  just  not  competent enough  for  this  job. All  right.  He  put  it  more  humorously, say,  I  guess  I'm  just  too  dumb,  you  know. All  right.  So  imagine what  are  you  telling  your  boss? What  are  you  telling  your  boss? I'm  just  no  good,  you  know,  right? So  I'm  just  no  good. So  I'm  useless,  you  know, that's  what  you're  telling  your  boss. So  that  means  like,  you  know, the  boss  should  set  you,  fire  you,  right? Because  you  are  dispensable,  in  a  sense. So  there's  the  first  scenario. No.  Imagine,  right? You  use  a  different  tech. Instead  of  saying  you  are  too  dumb. You  walk  into  your  boss  and  say, I  I  can't  find an  efficient  algorithm  because no  such  algorithm  exists. No  such  algorithm  is  possible.  It,  right? If  that's  true,  you  know  what  I  mean, there's  no  need  to  work  on  it. But  remember  your  boss,  you  know. You  think  your  boss  is  going  to  buy  that? What  do  you  see  in  a  boss, the  nature  characteristic  of  a  boss? What  they  care  about  is whether  you  can  do  the  job  or  not,  right? You  tell  them  it's  not  possible. If  you  tell  them  it's  not possible,  essentially, this  is  equivalent  to  telling  them right  that  you  are  not  good  enough. That's  why  you're  telling  your  boss. Right?  Yeah,  it  may  be  true. There's  no  such  algorithm. But  you  tell  that  to  your  boss,  your  boss. Yeah, he  doesn't  he  probably  doesn't  understand  or know  about  technical.  All  right. So  essentially,  you're  telling him,  you're  not  good  enough. All  right.  So  you  are  dispensable in  that  sense?  Okay. The  last  scenario,  you  walk  in? You  tell  your  boss. I  can't  find  an  efficient  algorithm, but  neither  can  all  these  famous  people. Who.  All  right? So  you're  telling  your  boss?  A. Nobody  can  solve  this  problem. But  indirectly,  what  you're telling  your  boss  is  this. All  right.  I  cannot  solve  this  problem. I  cannot  find  an  efficient  algorithm. But,  of  course,  you  can  fire  me,  right? But  even  if  you  fire  me, you  cannot  find  a  replacement. There's  nobody  that  can  do  this  job. All  right?  Okay? That  sounds.  Then  there's a  good  chance  you  may keep  your  job.  All  right. So  essentially,  I  think  this  scenario illustrate  to  us. When  we  solve  a  problem, it  is  important  to understand  the  kind  of problem  spend  some  time  to understand  the  problem  that you're  trying  to  solve  in  terms of  what  kind  of  problem, the characteristic  characteristic  of  the  problem, the  complexity,  and  so  on. Essentially,  that's  what  we have  been  doing,  right? For  the  last  hour  or  so. So  there  you  said  that,  right? O  motivation  or  objective is  to  learn  about  genetic  algorithm,  right? So  I  kind  of  take  it. I  don't  h  the  pace  of  what  I'm  covering. So  but  let's  now  take  a  look  at begin  to  look  at  what evolutionary  computing  is  all  about. So Okay. We  will  look  at  the  historical  perspective of  evolutionary  computing. Then  on  the  biological inspiration,  you  will  know, is  a  inspiration  from  nature, as  what  you  observe  in  living  on  nature. There  are  two  aspects based  on  the  biological  inspiration. Number  one  is  the  dminan  evolution. How  species  or  living  things  evolve. Now,  the  second  aspect  that we  draw  inspiration  from  would be  the  genetics  like the  DNA  we  are  talking  about. The  genetics  part. So  from  the  genetic  part, we  draw  inspiration  on  how  we  would actually  do  a  coding  similar  to  what. Genes  or  chromosomes  is. So  we  do  a  coding,  right? So  that's  why  in  later  on, when  you  see  your  genetic  algorithm, there's  this  so  called  different  we  talk about  coding  of  the  solutions and  so  on.  All  right. And  then  the  motivation for  evolutionary  computing. So  What  we  would have  to  be  clear  about  is that  genetic  algorithm  or evolutionary  algorithm or  evolutionary  computing, is  nothing  new.  It's  not  new. All  right? It's  not  new  because  since  the  1948, or  19  s  two, 1960s,  and  so  on, people  have  been  talking  about problem  solving  through  evolution. The  ideas  has  actually  been  put  for, how  you  can  actually  solve  problem using  more  like a  evolutionary  procedure  or  approach. But  then  of  course,  the  idea was  came  out  back  then, but  what's  so  different at  that  time  compared  to  now? You  must  remember  we  are  era  of, you  know,  computers  where we  can  actually  stimulate anything  that  we  want. Back  in  the  60s,  you  may  not  know  it. The  state  of  computing  the  capacity, and  so  on,  is  nothing  compared  to  now. All  right.  So  although  the  idea  was  there was  put  for  solving problems  using  evolutionary  kind  of  approach. All  right.  But  it  was  practically  not able  to  code  it  such  that  to demonstrate  the  full  potential or  what  it  can  do. All  right.  So  in  fact, it's  only  later  on  that  in the  80s  and  people  begin  to  look  back  at some  of  the  earlier proposed  evolution  approach and  simulate  it. All  right.  So  the  whole  era of  evolutionary  computing,  right? The  wil  turning  point, I  why  it  became  so  popular  or  why is  generally  accepted  as a  very  powerful  technique  is  1975. When  genetic  algorithms  was  proposed. In  75  John  Holland  proposed, what  we  call  a  genetic  algorithm. His  ideas  was  very  simple. He  said  your  solution  as  binary  values. Strings  of  binary  values. Make  samples  of  all  these  strings. We  call  that  a  population. Let  all  these  st  let all  these  binary  strings  evolve. Right  through  normal  process  of  reproduction, or  he  introduced  mutation. All  right.  And  the  reproduction  he  used  was what  we  call  the  crossover, very  simple  operation. Take  two  chromosome,  exchange  substring. All  right.  So  the  main  novelty  when  Holland proposed  it  was actually  the  crossover,  right? Now,  the  fact  that  it is  he  used  bnary  string, right  this  nice,  you  know,  easy. Illustrate  the  simplicity  of  the  approach,  a? That  was  a  turning  point.  All  right. After  the  introduction  of  genetic  algorithm, many  problems  or  many  people  begin  to  use GA  to  try  out  on different  type  of  optimization  problem. Right? No,  because  of  his  popularity,  right? Because  everybody  seems  to  be  using  GA. Whenever  they  use anything  that's  evolutionary, they  call  it  GA,  a  GA  for  doing  this, a  GA  for  doing  that. Henceforth,  we  are  so  used  to  it, we  say  it  is  a  GA  genetic  algorithm. That's  why  we  treat GA  as  more  like  a  general  term  now. Although  though,  right? To  have  a  better  understanding, you  must  be  clear  that GA  is  just  one  of  the  approach. In  your  so  called evolutionary  computing  technique. Then  it  comes  to  cosa,  genetic  programming. The  interesting  idea  on genetic  programming  is  that the  coding  of  it  represents  a, a  program,  like  a  tree or  a  fin  machine,  whatever  it  may  be. There's  a  main  difference  between genetic  programming  and  genetic  algorithms. So  how  do  you  see  what  happens  in  nature? To  correlate  with  so  called  something that  we  can  use  in  problem  sing. Well,  the  basis  of that  understanding  comes  from this  notion  that  We live  in  a  world  of  finite  resources. Environment,  you  know,  environment. We  have  finite  resources,  right? Everything  is  fit  limited. So  because  it's  limited, it  can  only  support certain  number  of  individuals,  right? The  size  of  the  population is  limited  in  that  sense. Now,  what  do  we  know  about  life  forms? In  nature,  it  is  programmed,  right? With  this  basic  instinct. I  nature  is  programming  this  basic  instinct. All  right,  or  life  cycles that  is  geared  towards  reproduction. The  whole  survival  cycle  and all  the  primary  driving  force is  reproduction. Right  to  propagate  the  species. You  understand?  So  the  driving  force. You  have  a  state  of  limited  resources, and  you  have  this  hard  wire in  nature  or  program  in  nature, that  instinct  of  reproduction. Reproduce  means  to  multiply to  generate  more  and  more. But  yet  you  have  limited  resources. So  how  is  this  to  resolve? Yeah. You  must  have  some  selection  mechanism. There  must  be  a  basis  for some  selection  in  nature. How  do  we  select?  Very  simple. Individuals  that  compete  for  resources  most effectively  have greater  chance  of  reproduction. That's  how  nature  is  programmed. All  right.  So  those  that  can  compete. Compete  in  terms  of  so called  getting  more  resources,  and  so  on. Compete  for  the  resources. Right? Those  would  be  the  one  that has  a  higher  chance for  survival  and  reproduction. So  that  means  that  if they  have  a  higher  chance, it  means  that  they  are  fit.  They  are  fit. So  what  constitute  fitness? Essentially  fitness  has  to  do  with  like the  capacity  to  be able  to  the  more  fit  you  are, the  more  able  you  are  to fight  for  that  limited  resources. So  here,  the  final  note here  is  right  fitness  is  in natural  evolution  is a  derived  secondary  measure,  right? So  we  assign  a  high  fitness to  individuals  with  many  offspring. As  far  as  we  are  concerned, as  consistent  with  nature, the  more  offspring  they  can  produce, then  they  are  considered  more  fit. And  also  a  little  bit  more about  Darwinian  evolution. So  the  whole  physical the  living  and  all  the  code make  up  of  what  what we  call  the  DNE  and  so  on. Now,  there's  this  part  here that  has  to  do  with competition  to  be  able  to  compete effectively  for  resources,  right? Now,  in  nature,  how  does  that  come  about? We  say  the  fitness  and  so  on,  isn't  it? All  right.  So  that  fitness has  to  do  with  the  expression  right? The  physical  expression  or  manifestation. Of  the  living  thing  or  the  individuals. Right.  So  that  physical  manufacturer is  what  we  call  the  phenotypic  traits,  right? The  phenotype. So  the  phenotypic  traits.  All  right. Basically  refers  to  the  behavior or  the  physical  the  physical  aspects  or difference  on  how  it deals  with  the  environment. And  so  how  is  it  determined? Well,  inheritance, and  also  other  external  factors in  the  development. So  it  is  also  unique  to  each  individual, right,  partly  as  a  result  of  random  changes. So  good  phenotypic  traits,  right? Generally  will  lead  to higher  chances  of  reproduction,  right? And  also  because  of  the  reproduction, then  the  chances  of  passing  on  or inheritance  is  better  or  higher. Okay.  So  it's  a  manifestation  of  the  so called  the  expression  on  how  we respond  to  the  real  world. And So  just  summarize a  little  bit  about  evolution,  right? So  in  nature,  we consider  the  unit  that  we talk  about  is  called  a  population,  right? So  you  say  a  population  of  species  and  so  on. So  So  the  combinations  of traits  that  are  better adapted  tend  to  increase representation  in  the  population. All  right.  So  the  propagation  of the  positive  traits  and how  it  responds  to  the  environment. In  essence,  when  we  do  selection, we  the  individuals.  All  right. The  individuals  are  actually the  units  of  selection. But  the  variations occur  through  random  changes, which  result  in  greater  diversity. So  what  we  want  to  see  is  also  diversity. So  that  when  you  have  diversity, more  traits  can  be  TR  or  AIT. More  traits  can  be represented  in  the  population. Some  of  the  traits  are  good, some  may  not  be  so  good  and  so  on. Okay. So  when  we  talk  about  evolution,  right? So  evolution  of  the  so called  the  whole  population,  right? When  you  refer  to  evolution, it's  not  evolution  of  one  single  individual. It's  the  whole  population that  evolves.  Right. To  evolves  means  to  change.  All  right. So  that  change  it refers  to  the  change  of  the  whole  population. So  that  is  evolution,  right? So  you  can  see  how  based  on that  metaphor  of  evolution,  right? The  general  idea  of  how  it  works. What's  the  driving  force  behind  the  changes? What's  the  motivation,  right? In  terms  of  what  traits  or qualities  to  pass  on  propagate  and  so  on. So  basically  the  in  essence, it  is  the  phenotypic  expressions  or the  traits  that  is being  passed  on  during  evolution. Okay.  The  next  aspect  will  be  on  genetics, how  it  comes  into  the  picture, how  it  is  used  as a  metaphor  to  formulate  our  algorithms. All  right.  But  perhaps  maybe  we  stop  here. Okay.  So  maybe  we  will  just  continue the  next  lecture  when  we  talk about  go  towards  the  evolutionary  algorithm, the  actual  constructs  of what  evolutionary  algorithm  is all  about.  All  right. So  I'll  see  you  next  week.  Thank  you. H.
