Good  morning. Just  a  reminder  next  week  is  our  quiz. All  right.  M  cart  only  has. My  card  only  has  one  quiz. Let  me  just  Okay. So  there  will  be  only  one  quiz, and  the  venue  is  spread  out over  three  LT,  LT  19  A, which  is  here  and  LT  two  A, which  is  across  and  LT  five. We  which  T  you  will  go, I  will  make  it  known  through  NTU. So  there  are  strict  rules  to  maintain, for  example,  you  should  not sit  next  to  each  other,  okay? You  should  maintain  one  empty  seat in  between  your  neighbor. So  this  is  a  written  closed  book,  15  minute. If  the  format  is  actually  all  written,  right? So  you  answer  provide your  answer  on the  questions  paper  I  gave  you. And  then  at  the  end  of  it, I  require  So  it  is  written. Cost  book  at  the  end  of  it, are  required  to  submit personally  and  then  sign  it. To  know  why  there  this  feedback. Okay. Pen,  you  only  need  your  pen  and  picture  ID. Okay.  Nothing  else. Don't  bring  anything  else, only  your  pen,  you  know, and  your  picture  ID. So  picture  ID.  No  need  to  use  your  phone. You  can  print  out,  right, your  student  card  or  bring  your  passport, any  picture  ID  will  do. Okay?  Don't  touch  your  phone,  leave  it  aside. Make  it  very  complicated,  you  know, If  you  wipe  out  your  phone  and  show  the  ID. Okay. Of  course,  mobile  phones  and smart  devices  are  prohibited. So  that's  next  week,  right, and  time  is  9:30  to  1030. So  if  we  are  absent  without  any  valid  reason, so  this  it  will  be  a  zero,  okay? Okay,  I  would  like  to  maybe  just  first summarize  what  we  did  the  last  lecture. So  call  this  recap  number  two. So  I  think  we  all  know  by  now, or  quite  clear  that this  whole  genetic  algorithm  is  all. The  inspiration  comes  from  nature.  All  right. And  specifically,  there  are two  aspects  of  you  know, where  we  learn  or  draw  from  nature. And  number  one  is  this  dawnsm, you  know,  natural  evolution, what  we  know  as  natural  evolution. Now,  the  principles, the  principles  principles  are  just like  rules  in  nature,  okay. So  the  rules  in nature  is  survival  or survival  of  the  fittest, and  then  the  selection, and  then  the  reproduction. So  reproduction  becomes  a  reward, you  know.  All  right. So  when  you  selection, obviously,  there's  competition, and  all  this  came  about  because  of so  called  insufficient  resources. And,  you  probably  heard about  the  term  metal  heuristics, or  you  may  not  have. So  genetic  algorithm  is one  of  the  meta  heuristic  technique. So  let  me  say  something  about the  term  mato  heuristic. Heuristic  you  know, all  these  heuristics  are  rule  of  um. In  your  everyday  life, you  have  a  certain  rule  of thumb  on  how  you  carry  out  things. Now,  the  word  changes the  meaning  a  little  So  Mato  can  be perceived  as  a  higher  form  of heuristics  or  heuristics  about heuristics  or any  other  additional  connotation that  comes  with  it. So  the  word  method  heuristics in  this  case,  is  a  heuristic, that's  not  based  on  human  knowledge, but  it's  a  heuristic  that's  based  on  nature. The  heuristics  of  like survival,  selection,  and  so  on. So  that's  why  the  term  metho  heuristics. So  don't  be  surprised or  it  should  be  known  to  you  that anytime  okay  people  say GA  is  a  method  heuristics, stri  just  like  end  quality  optimization. Or  B  optimization,  W  optimization. All  these  are  metaheuristics,  metaheuristics. The  other  aspect  of a  so  called  inspiration  that  comes from  nature  is  the  genetics  aspect. We  know  about  the  DNA. We  draw  on  the  inspiration  metaphor  of  DNA, to  use  it  as  a  of  the  problem. The  physical  expression  of  the  w.  Okay. So  these  are  the  two  areas of  inspirations  we  draw  from  nature. Okay.  So  it's  quite  nice  when  you use  a  technique  and  then  you understand  where  it  comes  from, rather  than  just  saying,  Okay, this  is  a  GA,  and  I'm  using  GA,  right? But  if  you  see  it  further and  beyond  this  area,  yeah, this  is  a  technique  that  has an  interesting  background  being a  metaphor  inspiration  from  nature. So  then  we  go  into  or  we went  into  the  EA  framework  itself. I  know  you're  convinced  that the  whole  framework  is  actually  very  simple. It  consists  of  three  blocks. I  think  it's  quite  clear  in your  mind  what  these  three  blocks  means, like  the  population,  parents, and  then  the  offspring, and  how  they  interplay to  form  a  so  called  a  cycle, which  we  known  as  generations. The  program  or  algorithm runs  through  many  generations. Until  we  reach  a  state of  where  you  can  terminate, terminate  depends  on  conditions, what  you  need, or  convergence,  different  criteria. And  I  hope  you  understand,  right? Using  the  end  queen,  you  know, how  we  went  from  representation to  implementation. So  the  whole  issuance  about bringing  what  you  see in  the  real  world,  right? And  you  have  a  problem  to tackle  and  how  to  bridge it  towards  the  stage  where  you can  implement  it  as  algorithm. And  that's  what  we  talked  about, and  I  hope  you  are  familiar  with  that. Representation.  Today  we  will  talk we'll  do  out  a  lot  about  representation, how  we  represent  the  problem.  All  right. Essentially,  of  course,  a  representation  is that  you  got  to  represent it  such  that  you  describe  or represent  the  scenario  in  the  real  world. And  very,  very  important  concept, GA  operates  on  two  main  types  of  operations. The  whole  idea  of  o  the  operations  in GA  is  just  to  create  that  kind  of  variation. Why  variation  because  you  want  diversity. We  talk  about  diversity,  isn't  it? You  want  to  create  the  kind  of  variation. And  there  are  only  two  types. One  is  a  mutation, and  one  is  a  recombination. Mutation  is  very  random. Recombination  is  like  reproduction. You  pass  on  is  a  form  of learning  from  what  you  know  in  the  past. Marcus  in  we  say  is selective  process  or  selection  process. So  whatever  operations, you  got  to  suit  the  representation. Today,  we'll  look  very  closely  at  how the  different  operations  can manifest  depending  on the  different  types  of  representation. And  we  did  a  hand  simulation, on  what  function  optimization. Very  simple  simulation  just  to illustrate  the  concept  of  how  GA, right,  the  internal  of how  GA  evolved,  the  population. So  that  was  what  we  did  last  time,  right? So  quite  clear  and  this thing  is  what  we  covered. So  when  you  study,  you  go  to  this, ask  yourself,  you  know,  what  do you  know  about  each  of  this  topic. And  today,  We  continue  a  bit  to  look at  we're  starting  to talk  about  evolutionary  algorithm in  perspective,  right? So  EA  in  context. Now,  basically,  the question  you  want  to  ask  yourself, somebody  asked  you  is,  how  good  is  this  EA? Obviously,  you  got  to  draw some  kind  of  comparison,  you  know, to  put  in  perspectives, the  performance  of the  evolutionary  algorithm,  right? Now,  They  are  actually different  people  would  describe  or will  have  very  different  views  of  it. Now,  what  we  know, quite  certainly  is  when you  have  a  problem  to  solve, chances  are  you  design  a  two. Such  is  good  at solving  that  particular  problem. That  will  be  the  case. Now,  this  is  a  problem, so  I  come  up  with  a  so  called  a  two. But  regardless, What  we  want  and  what  we  hope  for, what  we  wish  is a  tool  that  does well  in  everything  in all  the  problem,  isn't  it? So  we  want  a  tool,  you  know, that's  all  purpose  to,  you  know? So  we  wish  that  could  be  a  tool,  right? And  for  a  while,  we were  thinking,  maybe  that's  possible. Is  it  possible?  Let's  back it  up  and  let's  understand  in  proper  context, you  know,  when  we  say  we are  looking  for  this  tool  here, the  so  called  a  special  tool,  right? O  ithm  that  can  solve  all  the  problems. So  let's  consider  the  traditional  view of  evolutionary  alg  low. I  would  say  traditional  the  older  view, early  days  when  EA or  genetic  algorithm  first  came  about. So  in  order  to  sketch  a, a  performance  of  algorithms,  right? Any  problem  solving  algorithms. On  the  vertical  scale,  Okay. On  the  vertical  scale. That's  a  performance. All  right.  Now,  on  the  horizontal  scale, scale  of  all  problems. I  want  you  to  take  pay  attention to  all  all  problems. If  I  say  this  is  a  random  algorithm, you  know  what  a  random  algorithm  is. Just  search  randomly. What  would  be  the  performance of  these  algorithms? And  this  high  chance  you answer  is,  pretty  okay. It  doesn't  work,  but the  performance  maybe  not  as  good. Quite.  That's  a  random  search. If  you  have  a  special  so  called  method, tailored  to  the  problem,  you  customize  it. What  do  you  expect  the  performance  to  be? It  will  be  very,  very  good  for a  so  called  a  class  of  problems, restricted  class  of  problems because  it  is  custom. Therefore,  you  see  this  plot  here. In  the  early  days,  right? EA.  Genetic  algorithm  is touted  to  be  a  generally  good  method, a  generally  good  method, better  than  your  random  search. All  right.  Of  course,  on  certain  problems, if  you  have  a  custom  algorithm,  of  course, EA  may  not  mean  up.  That's  quite  natural. So  conceptually,  I  think  we  see  it as  a  reasonable  reasonable, so  called  description  in the  context  of  G  A,  right? How  it  fare  against  the  problems? In  recent  years.  We  have begun  to  put  knowledge,  right? So  we  have  begun  to  in  the  90s,  right? And  this  is  one  of the  area  that  I  worked  in  very closely  for  my  research. All  right.  So  we  have  begun  to  so called  incorporate  knowledge  about the  problem  into  the  algorithm. And  the  reason  is  very  simple, we  want  to  drive  the  performance If  you  know  something  or special  knowledge  about  the  problem, if  you  incorporate  in  the  GA, it  should  help  you  to  push the  performance  up, that's  what  the  tendency  is. But  when  you  push  the  performance, when  you  customize  it,  obviously, you  want  to  change  the  curve, the  performance  curve, the  one  that  I  showed  you  earlier. Now,  back  to  the  question. What's  your  wish  in  terms  of algorithm?  What's  your  wish? All  purpose  algorithm,  right? One  size  fits  all  kind  of  algorithm. An  algorithm  solves  all  the  problem. That's  your  wish.  That's  a  wish,  right? Is  that  possible?  Very  naturally  you  say  no. Logically,  it  shouldn't  be  possible. It's  not  possible  there's  no  such  thing, which  you  are  right. But  how  do  you  explain from  a  theory  point  of  view? It's  not  possible.  In  order  to  do  that, let's  look  at  the  so  called  the  curve  again. This  is  the  EA.  We  have no  EA  is  generally  a  good  technique. Now,  the  moment  you incorporate  some  knowledge  into  it. When  there's  some  knowledge in  or  embedded  in  the  EA. Obviously,  it  will  solve the  problem  a  little  bit  better. You  create  this  de  deformation. This  EA  two,  let's  say  you  have even  more  specialized  knowledge or  you  have  a  more  customization. The  curve  is  deformed. And  you  have  so called  even  more  customization,  right? So  shows  you  that  the  performance, you  can  drive  up  the  performance,  okay? But  the  more  knowledge  you  have, right,  the  more  restricted is  a  class  of  problem. You  can  solve  it  very,  very  well,  right? But  the  class  of  problems that  is  able  to  solve is  a  bit  restricted.  So  here's  a  question. Which  is  better? Which  algorithm  is  better? E  A  one,  e  two, e  A  three,  e  four. Obviously  from  the  curves, you  see  that  if  I  want  to solve  P  plus  a  P  problem, E  four,  is  the  best. No  question  about  it.  But  if  I  ask  you. What's  the  performance?  A? How  do  you  compare  the  performance  on average  among all  the  algorithms.  All  the  problems. What's  the  performer  average performance  among  all? All  I  emphasize  it  with  all  the  problem. What's  your  conclusion? What's  the  average  performance? Same?  Average.  You  notice that  the  average  performance is  the  same.  Or  ten  bit? Assuming  assuming  you  accept  these  graphs. You  accept  these  graphs as  so  called  the  view  of how  algorithms  are  fair the  performance  of  algorithm. So  you  accept  this  view. And  from  these  graphs  here, my  question  is  what's  the average  performance  for  all, I  emphasize  that  all  the  problems, do  you  agree  that  the  average  is  the  same? All  right.  The  average  performance  is  the same  for  all  the  problems. All  right.  So  in  other  words, all  the  algorithms,  they  are  the  same. The  average  performance. Okay?  So  put  your  question  earlier  on, do  we  have  all  purpose algorithm  that  can  solve  the  problem? No.  Probably  not  according  to  this  theory. Now,  this  is  what  in  optimization. We  call  it  the  NFL, the  no  free  lunch  theorem. The  no  free  lunch  theorem. And  this  is  the  theory that  backs  it,  you  know, rather  than  just  say  not  possible, but  we  have  theory,  recent  theory, the  paper  by  so  called  McCred. Is  kind  of  a  classic  table  and  optimization. It  proves  so  called what  they  call  the  no  free  lunch  theorem. There's  no  free  lunch  and  optimization. The  moment  you  do  well  in  one  problem, right,  you  will  sacrifice on  the  performance  of  other  problem. Optimization.  Whenever  you think  about  optimization, people  say  no  free  lunch, you  understand  what  it  means. And  a  good  graph  to  depict  it. This  is  the  so  called  performance. So  in  global  optimization,  right? Sometimes  many  times  I  talk  to  people. They  always  use  the  term  global  optimization and  optimization  very  loosely. Now,  to  be  correct  or  technically  correct, you  got  to  be  specific. If  you  are  talking about  global  optimization,  global. That  means  that  you  are  searching over  all  the  possibilities. You're  doing  a  global  search. So  you're  finding  the  best  ution out  of  so  called  the  best. Take  not  the  best. You  want  to  look  for  the  best. That's  your  objective, but  whether  you  get  it  or  not, that  is  another  issue. So  there's  global  optimization. So  we  have  GA  offers  itself  as a  so  called  a  heuristic  approach or  more  specifically, what  we  call  the  method  heuristic  approach. Now,  let's  do  a  little  bit  of comparison  to  see  the  characteristics. So  typically,  in  the  early  days, our  techniques  are  usually the  deterministic  approach. For  example,  so  called your  branch  and  bound,  right? You  branch  and  bound  method. So  deterministic.  Put  it  very  simply, every  time  you  run  it,  is  guaranteed  to. If  the  problem  is  complex, it  may  take  too  long. In  theory,  you  should  be  able  to  find  it, but  it's  just  impractical. We  saw  earlier  on  that there's  this  MP  kind  of  problem. If  you  use  a  deterministic  approach, you  may  never  solve  it  in  your  lifetime. That's  a  so  called  that's  what deterministic  approaches is  Heuristic  approach. That's  why  people  use  heuristic  approach. Okay. So  heuristic  approach  is  basically  rules. Rules  for  usually  rules  for  deciding, okay,  where  do  I  go  next? So  I  have  a  certain  rule  or heuristic  that  guides  me in  the  so  called  a  search. Okay. But  the  problem  of  not actually  the  problem  is  a  characteristic  of heuristic  because  it  so called  is  a  search  that  is guided  by  rules,  right? And  these  rules  are  non  deterministic. So  no  guarantee the  best  solution  found,  right? So  there's  no  guarantee, and  no  bound  on  no  time. Ask  me  for  what's the  worst  worst  case,  right, computing  time,  you  know, I  probably  the  best  I could  say  is  I  should be  reasonable  at  the  time. I  don't  have  a  specific  quantitative  formula to  give  you  the  bound  of  the  g. What  you've  seen  is  that On  the  deterministic  approach,  right? Basically  your  mentality  is  okay. I  don't  really  care  if  it  works. As  long  as  it  converges. As  I  said,  deterministic  approach,  right? Especially  in  light  of the  problems  that  we  are dealing  with  the  complexity. A  lot  of  times  it  doesn't  work, but  it  does  converge. So  when  we  converge  may not  be  even  close  to  the  best  solution. Well  heuristic  is  the  mentalities that  I  don't  care,  right? I  don't  care  if  it  converges. But  as  long  as  it  works. You  know  you'll  give  you  a  solution, a  reasonably  good  solution. Okay.  All  right. So  generally,  I  think  we also  global  optimization  and there's  also  a  neighborhood  search,  right. So  So  basically, when  we  talk  about  local  search,  right? You  know  global  search. And  then  you  say,  you know  what's  local  search. All  right?  Local  search, you  search  within  your  vicinity. So  when  you  talk  about  local  search, right,  the  term  or the  concept  of  local  means that  you're  searching  nearby. Right?  You're  looking  around  your  neighbor. You're  looking  around  your  neighbor. If  you  have  a  solution  is  say, where  do  I  go  next? So  if  it's  local, then  you  will  look  around your  neighbor.  Sounds  very  simple. But  what  is  the  meaning  of  neighbor? I  was  the  meaning  of  neighbor. Well, neighborhood  could  mean  different  thing. For  example,  in  your  coding, it  could  mean  a  difference  in  the  gene  value. Or  it  could  mean. When  converted  to  the  female  type  expression, it  is  very  similar. Or  it  could  mean  the  having  distance or  different  measures. So  that's  what  neighborhood  means,  right. So  be  clear  that when  you  talked  about  neighborhood  in  GA, it  could  mean  different  things. And  a  lot  of  the  time, the  heuristics  technique  that  we  use, based  on  the  structure  of  the  landscape, so  that  we  understand what  the  so  called  the  neighborhood  means. So  this  is  pertaining  to  so  called  what we  see  as  more  of  a  localized  search. Now,  today,  I  want  to  carry  on,  right? And  I  will  go  to  the  second  set  of  notes. All  right.  So  you  see  where  GA  stands  now. You  understand  the  NFL,  no  free  lunch. I  find  that  NFL is  a  very  interesting  concept. O  for  that  matter,  you  know, how  you  will  see  problems or  life  in  general,  right? There's  no  free  lunch  in  whatever  you  do and  in  optimization,  same  thing. Okay.  So  now  let's  talk about  specifics  about  implementation. And  Clearly,  one  of the  more  important  aspect of  optimization  using  GA. When  you're  trying  to  solve  a  problem  is to  first  think  of  a  way  to  represent. How  based  on  the  problem  description or  problem  that  you  have, how  do  you  represent?  The  solution. So  based  on  the  so  called how  do  you  represent  it  as  a  chromosome? And  all  such  that  your  GA is  able  to  manipulate. So  There  are  generally five  types  of  representation of  the  genomes  in  GA. Number  one  is  the  most  common  the  binary, used  to  be  when  GA  was  first  invented, I  would  say  invent,  first proposed  back  in  2075  by  Holland. He  relied  a  lot  on  or  he demonstrated  using binary  coding  or  binary  representation. From  there,  it  became  very  popular and  many  problems  were solved  using  binary  representation. But  of  course,  these  days, it  is  also  very,  very  common to  see  integer  representation. So  the  string  itself are  represented  as  integer, and  there  are  also  many, many  problems  that  are  real  value. Like  for  example,  the  control  setting,  right? Let's  say  in  your  PID  control,  right? How  do  you  so  called  decide what's  the  setting  of  the  gain, for  example,  permutation  and  lastly  three. So  we  look  at  these five  types  of  representation. Now, because  the  representation  are  different, you  must  have  variation  operators that  suits  the  representation. Right?  Whatever  works  in  binary may  not  work  directly  in  let's  say  integer. Okay.  But  by  and  large, there  are  commonalities or  similarities  between the  different  types  of  operations. All  right.  So  the  operations are  variation  operations in  particular  V.  We  know  of  two, or  usually  in  G  A,  there  are  two. There's  a  recombination.  All  right. Recombination  and  mutation.  Okay. So  this,  of  course, is  right  now  you  are  very familiar  this  whole  structure  here. So  if  you  can  visualize  this, I  think  you  have a  pretty  reasonable  appreciation of  the  whole  framework  or  structure  EA. So  representation  is  the  first  step in  building  an  EA. So  it's  the  first  step. It  is  the  step  that  breach the  real  world  problem right  to  the  GA,  the  algorithm  itself. And  along  with  that  also depending  on  your  representation, you  got  to  think  about  the  mutation and  recombination  or  crossover. So  what  variation  operators you  use  depends  on  the  representation. For  example,  if  you  think in  terms  of  a  traveling  salesman  problem. So  they  are  different possible  representations. All  right. You've  seen,  for  example, you  can  use  binary although  you  will  see  later  on that  binary  representation  may  not  be the  most  suitable  or  convenient  for  TSP. Or  you  can  use  another  type, which  is  a  permutation  representation. So  let's  quickly  look  at first  the  binary  representation. I've  said  it  a  few  times. Binary  is  when  GA was  first  demonstrated  or  proposed. It  was  mainly  on  binary. Many  problems  have  been  solved using  your  binary  representation. The  idea  of binary  representation  is  very  simple. You  have  a  phenotype  space. Right? This  is  like  the  problem  itself, the  problem  that  you're  trying to  solve,  okay? Now,  this  problem  you're  trying  to  solve, once  you  understand  it, you  got  to  think  of  how  to  represent  it. Let's  say  in  our  mind, we  decide  we  want  to use  binary  representation.  All  right. So  the  process  of converting  your  problem  which corresponds  to  the  phenotype  space to  the  chromosome  or  the  genotype  space. So  that  is  called  encoding. Encoding  is  representation  as in  this  case,  here,  binary  strings. So  genotype  space  because  it's  binary. It  is  in  the  space  of  discrete  values  of 01  to  the  L  dimension. L  would  be  the  length  of  the  string. So  that  is  representation. Of  course,  at  the  same  time  also, you  got  to  think  about  decoding. Decoding  is  just  opposite or  inverse  of  your  representation. And  quite  straightforward,  using  binary. Then  of  course  we  think  of  the  so called  the  mutation  type  of  operation. Mutation  is  a  little  bit  random. Usually  driven  by  probability. So  this  probability  is a  probability  of  mutation. For  example,  when  you  say  10%  mutation, that  means  that  one  in  ten  chance that  it  will  it  will  mutate. And  when  it  mutate,  what's  the  value? The  characteristic  of  mutation is  it  generates randomness  to  create  that  kind  of  variation. So  when  you  mutate  a  gene, a  binary,  which  is  either  zero  or  one, and  you  know  it  is  random. If  it  is  zero  when  you  mutate  it, if  it  says  to  mutate, what's  the  other  possible  random? O. The  valley  is  one  you  mutated, you  mutate  it  to  zero. In  that  sense,  mutation in  binary  is  straightforward, because  the  so  called the  genome  space  is  only  zero  and  one. Right? Normally,  we  have  P  M, there's  a  probability  of  mutation. There's  a  general  guide  here  that  says the  rate  of  mutation  usually  not  big. Typically  between  one over  the  population  size and  one  over  the  chromosome  size  length. There's  just  a  guide.  But  just  remember, mutation  rate  usually  is  small. What  happens  if  you  put very  high  mutation  rate?  What  does  that  mean? If  the  mutation  rate  is  very  high, for  example,  0.8  or  80%,  what  does  that  mean? Let  me  say  you're  just  randomly  flipping. So  chances  are  that  will  be  closer  to just  random  search  of  approach. Not  mutation  is  you  incorporate  randomness, but  only  what  we  say  sporadically, is  not  too  frequent because  if  it's  too  frequent, then  that  is  just  like  doing  a  random  search. The  way  we  incorporate  mutation, for  example,  you  have  two  strings  here. The  parent  is  a  mutation. Remember,  mutation  is  a  unary  operation. It  takes  one  chromosome, and  then  it  carries  out  the  mutation. Normally,  the  way  it  is done  is  you  go  to  the  first  gene, flip  a  mutation  coin. Mutation  say  yes,  then  you  do  mutation. For  example,  you  go  to  the  first  gene, you  flip  this  mutation  coin.  It  says  mutate. Then  you  flip  it  to  zero. Then  you  go  to  the  second  g and  you  say  flip  the  mutation  coin. He  says,  don't  mutate, so  remains  as  one. Then  go  to  the  third  one, mutate  change  to  zero  so  on. That's  how  mutation  is. So  let's  ponder  a  little bit  about  mutation,  right? So  Mutation,  of  course, is  to  cause  that  variation,  right? And  also  remember  that  this  is  a  bit  random. So  when  you  create the  kind  of  randomness  in  the  variation, hopefully  you'll  see  equal  chance. You  say?  Be  random, hopefully  it  will  be  equal  chance,  right? But  when  you  think  about, let's  say,  binary  coding. For  example,  if  I  say  the  binary  coding, this  is  a  binary  coding. When  you  decode  it, it  represents  an  integer. Right?  So  meaning  the  phenotype  space is  integer  value. Okay.  Now  my  question  is, Mutation  on  the  earlier  genes as  compared  to  mutation  on  the  later  genes. Which  one  has  more  effect? Remember  I  said  the  minor  coding, when  you  decode  it,  it  is integer  value.  All  right. So  mutation  on  the  earlier, the  more  significant  genes  compared to  the  significant  genes, which  one  has  greater  effect? Obviously,  you  will  see  that  the  one that  the  more  significant  bits,  right? So  remember,  we  say  mutation is  supposed  to  be  random,  right? So  in  that  sense,  there's some  kind  of  bias,  right? So  there's  some  kind  of  bias. So  there's  one  mutation that's  one  of  the  effect depending  on  the  coding,  right? So  if  that  becomes  an  issue  for  you, then  you  got  to  think  of  way,  right? So  one  way  is  we  say maybe  use  grey  coding,  right? Okay.  So  let's  move  to  cross  over. So  Mutation  very  straightforward, by  recoding, zero  to  11  to  zero  and  is  random  and  based on  mutation  rate  piece,  usually  very  small. Crossing  over  crossing  over the  purpose  is  a  form of  recombination  or  reproduction. So  it  implements  what we  call  the  inheritance, a  form  of  learning  in  nature. So  we  decide  on  a  crossover  point. So  this  cross  over  point  is  to  split the  parents  right  into  two  strands. So  this  is  a  whole  chromosome  here. So  if  this  is  my  crossover  site, I  essentially  split  the  chromosome into  two  parts.  So  I  crossing  over. So  after  I  choose  the  crossover  site, I  construct  the  children. Part  of  it  come  from  parent  one, part  of  it  come  from  parent  two. So  quite  clear  what  he's  trying  to  do. And  remember,  in  I think  you  can  you understand  the  framework  involved. Parents  are  already  being selected  because  of  the  fitness,  correct? There's  a  selection  that  play. So  normally,  whatever  parents are  selected,  usually  they  are  fitted. So  when  you  carry  out  so  called this  crossover  or  reproduction,  right? Then  chances  are  the  parents are  generally  better  among  the  population. With  this  crossover,  you  combine traits  from  two  parents and  then  generate  an  offspring. Hopefully  the  children  or  the  offspring  will be  will  evolve  to  higher  fitness. Is  that  the  only  crossover? Well  we  can  So we  can  look  at  other  possibilities  in  binary. So  binary  is  a little  bit  more  straightforward. So  there's  nothing  that  stops  us from  doing  a  mult  multiple  side  crossover. For  example,  choose  more  than  one  crossover. So  I  think  you  would  see  this as  somewhat  to  be  can  be  useful, especially  when  you  have  very  long  string. I  string  like  a  couple  of  100  bits  and  so  on. So  this  is  multi  point  crossover, choose  more  than  one  point. So  when  you  have  a  multiple  point, a.  Let's  look  at  some. Choose  n  random  crossover  points,  right? N  is  a  number  of  crossover  side. Then  we  split  those  the  chromosome along  the  multiple  sides,  right? And  then  we  grou  parts alternating  between  parents. So  the  off  swing  that  is  generated, we  just  alter  the  first  one, the  first  0000  comes  from  parent  one, and  then  after  that  parent  two  contributes. 111.  Parent  two  contributes  111  and  so  on. So  quite  easy  to  see what  is  going  on  here.  Okay? We  can  have  uniform  crossover. Just  go  to  each  one  and then  just  randomly  flip. Okay.  So  this  is when  when  one  of  the  early  days  on  GA,  right? So  in  the  early  days  on  GA,  you  know, they  were  mainly binary  coding  types  of  GA,  right. And  what  Holland  proposed  was that  you  have  mutation  and  crossover,  right? The  idea  of  crossover was  quite  norvel  at  that  time. Right.  And  then  along the  way  people  began  to  wonder,  you  know, do  I  necessarily  needs these  two  types  of  operations? So  Questions  or  debates  and  to which  one  is  more  important,  you  know, can  you  just  focus  on  just  crossover  without the  mutation  or  vice  versa? Right.  And  of  course, I  think  We  have people  have  begun  to generally  accept  that  both  are  important, at  this  point,  both  are  important. This  is  particularly  so  if  you understand  it  from  the  point of  view  of  diversity. In  optimization,  is  juggling,  or  you  manage. The  whole  issue  is  about  managing  diversity, right?  You  want  diversity. But  at  the  same  time, you  also  want  so  called  to  be very  specific  meaning  when  you do  the  selection  you choose  for  best  solution. So  both  affects  the  diversity  differently. So  So  both  the  recombination  and  the  mutation has  different  role  in  terms  of  the  so called  increases the  variation  to  give  the  diversity. Now, on  the  other  hand,  there's  selection  that cause  the  diversity  to  come  down  and  so  on. And  we  already  asked this  question  earlier  on,  right? Is  mutation  if  you have  to  choose  between  these  two, which  one  would  you  choose? Well,  we  already  know  the  answer. Mutation  or  EA  is  possible, cross  over  on  the  EA  would  not  work  Okay. So  from  the  concept  of  diversity. All  right.  So  Diversity res  is  about  managing  diversity. Now,  when  you  do  a  search, when  you  when  you  do  a  search,  right? So  you  have  a  landscape. Imagine  like  you  are  searching  for a  solution  in  a  landscape,  right? To  so  called  two  process  is  involved. One  is  that  you  want  to  explore. You  want  to  exploit  as  much  as possible,  right? At  the  same  time  because  you are  looking  for  a  solution. The  solution  that's  best. And  then  you  also  want  to  exploit. If  you  know  something  is  really  good, you  want  to  exploit,  make  it  even  better. There's  exploiting. There  are  two  forces  at  work  here. There's  exploration  and  exploitation. Mm. So  they  need  to  be  both  unnecessary, the  exploration  and  the  exploitation,  right. So  therefore,  is  a  balance between  the  exploration  and  exploitation. So  it  turns  out  that  your  crossover is  exploration,  right? It's  explorative. So  it  makes  a  big  jump  to  an  area somewh  between  the  two  parent. A  little  bit  like  interpolation. You  have  two  parents  here, you'll  find  something  that  is  in  between. You  explore  in  that  sense. Mutation  is  exploitative. You  already  have  a  solution. Now  you're  hoping  that  if I  make  a  small  variation. Then  maybe  there's  a  chance that  it  will  be  better. If  somebody  comes  around  and  say, look  my  GA  is  not  working  that  well. From  a  high  level  perspective, you  say  you  must incorporate  more  exploitation.  All  right. So  in  the  context  of  GA, maybe  increase  the  mutation of  a  little  bit,  right, or  increase  the  so  called  crossover to  improve  the  performance. These  are  some  of  the so  called  characteristics  again. Only  crossover  can  combine information  from  two  parents  and only  mutation  can  introduce new  information,  right?  That's  o. Something  to  think  about. If  you  binary  coding. Let's  say  initially, the  frequencies  of  zero  and  one. The  frequencies  of  zero  is  50%. Frequencies  of  one  is also  50%  in  the  population. After  ten  generations  the frequency  of  zero  and  one. Same  different. Initially,  the  frequency, the  number  of  zeros  and  number  of  one, the  ratio  is  one  is  to  one. After  ten  times  crossover,  what  is  the  ratio? Should  still  be  50%. Cross  doesn't  so  called  alter. So  but  mutation  does,  right? That's  why  you  can  imagine  that, you  know,  if  you have  only  a  cross  over  operation. And  in  your  binary  coding, after  100  generations, the  number  of  zeros and  one  is  still  the  same. So  there's  no  that  kind of  a  random  variation  that  is  incorporated. So  therefore,  that's  that's  one  way  to explain  why  mutation  is  necessary. Because  mutation  still  plays a  role  to  explore. Explore  by  introducing  new  information. There's  binary.  Let's  talk about  Ididal  representation. Binary,  of  course,  is something  that  we  started  off  it. When  GA  first  came  about, we  mainly  binary  representation. As  we  solve  more  and  more  problems, we  began  to  see that  other  representations  may be  more  effective  and  more  convenient. On  one  representation  that  we  can think  of  would  be  representation  as  integer. Integer  means  that  instead of  the  zero  and  one  genome  space, now  it  is  one,  two,  three,  four. For  example,  there  are  four  classes. Your  genome  space  will  be  a  set  of  values. All  right.  So  let's  say  you  want  to encode  color,  there  are  three  values. All  right,  RGB,  for  example, those  are  indigal  values.  All  right. You  want  to  do  sorting. What's  the  best  way  to  sort  so called  a  group  of a  list  of  items  into  three  classes. All  right.  The  classes. In  your  coding,  you  may  have  31,  two,  three, one  corresponds  to  class  one, two  corresponds  to  class  two, and  three  corresponds  to  class  three. Okay.  So  then  we  would  think  about. For  example,  if  it  is  indigal  representation, how  would  we  do  mutation? So  mutation  in  binary. Is  quite  clear  cut. There's  no  argument  about  it, zero  flip  to  112  flip  to  zero. What  about  if  it's  integral  representation? For  example,  you  have  integral  set  of  five, one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  when  you  mutate. What  are  the  possible  ways  you  can cause  the  gene  to  alter? So  one  way  is  to  add a  small  positive  or  negative  value to  each  gene  with  probability  of  p. So  you  add  a  small  so  called  value, right,  which  is  positive  or  negative. But  There's  one  way  to  do  it. But  in  doing  that, there's  this  possibility  of  what we  call  creeping,  creeping. Because  you  only  make  a  small  step. In  time  as  the  generation  progresses, many  of  the  so  called  individuals  in the  population  will  creep towards  similar  value  or  convergence. The  result  of  this  is  what  we  call the  so  called  premature  convergence. So  that's  what  can  happen  in your  indigo  representation,  right? So  another  way  is just  random  resetting,  okay? Now,  I  need  to  emphasize  on  the  fact  that unlike  in  your  binary  is  zero  to  one, you  know,  it  is  a  complete  change. But  if  it  is  a  indigal  representation,  right? So  adding  positive  or  negative  value is  possible,  right? But  every  time  you  just  moving it  one  small  steps  and  so  on. So  although  that  sounds  like  it  will  work, but  there's  a  so  called  clipping  phenomena that  can  happen  in your  indigal  representation. And  then  we  can  do  random  resetting,  right? So  a  random  reset  with  a  certain  probability. And  so  recombination  is  quite  similar,  right? Quite  similar  to  your  binary. Whatever  we  did  in your  binary  for  the  crossover is  also  applicable  in your  indigal  representation. So  not  sure  if  you  have  heard  of the  draft  coloring  problem  or  not,  right? So  u  a  graph  coloring  problem,  right? One  way  to  illustrate  is  imagine you  have  map  of  the  United  States. So  you  have  a  map  of  the  United  States, so  you  are  a  printer because  let's  say  you  want  to  print  this  map, make  it  easily  visible. So  then  you  need  to  color  it. So  you  need  to  color  it  with different  colors,  the  different  region. For  example,  the  first  region  here, and  this  one,  right? If  you  color  in  the  same  color, then  you  cannot  distinguish. So  it  is  best  like  this  region, the  one  I'm  pointing  to, and  this  adjacent  region  is  different  color. So  your  role  is  to  assign  different  colors to  different  regions,  right? With  the  requirement  that two  adjacent  regions  must not  have  the  same  color. So  when  people  solve  this  problem, this  becomes  a  graph  coloring  problem. So  you  can  So you  can  right? So  for  example,  you  can  say  this  is  one. This  is  two,  this  is  three,  all. Four,  five,  six,  seven, eight,  and  so  on. So  each  of  the  region  is  assigned. Let's  say  identity. Then  this  is  called  a  graph  coring  problem. You  representation  could  be  a  graph. So  let  me  just  use  one  of  this. So  if  you look at So  O, one  is  connected  to  two,  one  is  two, and  then  two  is  three, six  is  connected  to  one. And  then  seven  and  two, and  six,  let's  do  15. Five,  four,  and  so  on, five,  six,  seven,  and  so  on. So  I  then  you  see  how  we  can actually  represent  it  as  a  graph. Now  in  graph  coloring, this  of  course  is  your  age, and  this  is  your  text. In  graphing, basically  the  problem  becomes  one  of. Assigning  a  color  to  each  of  the  vertex. So  you  assign  a  color  to  each  of  the  vertex, such  that  vertices  that  are adjacent  to  each  other should  not  have  the  same  color. All  right?  That's  how  even essentially  you  represent  the  prod. So  when  you  do  your  coding,  right? Let's  say  you  want  to  assign you  have  three  different  colors. You  are  the  printer.  You  have three  different  colors  to  use. Your  coding  could  be one  represent  region  one,  you  know. So  one  is  represented  as  color  one, color  two,  one,  three,  two,  one,  one Three  T. This  will  be  a  coding,  this is  a  integer  coating. Your  genome  ss is  L. L  will  be  the  number  of  regions. That's  essentially  what  we  are talking  about  in  the  graph coloring.  All  right. So  GA  can  solve  this,  you  know, much  difficulty.  A  not  difficult. I  would  say  not  difficult  to  come  up with  a  GA  to  solve  a  problem  like  this. And  not  only  this, there  are  many  problems  in classifications,  right? For  example,  your  problem. So  the  questions  asked  will be  in  this  let's  say  in  general, we  say  this  is  a  K  covering  problem. What  is  K? Here  are  the  so  called the  points  that  we  would  ask. K  is  the  minimum. The  minimum  number  of  color to  color  all  the  regions such  that  no  two  regions adjacent  to  each  other  are  the  same  color. And  we  always  want the  minimum  number  of  colors. So  assume  k  equal  to  three. What  is  the  suitable  for  G  A? So  I  just  described  to  you, right  if  k  equal  to  three, then  the  genome  space  will  be  one,  two, three,  to  the  L  dimension. So  it  is  basically  individual  coding. So  you  can  write an  objective  function  to evaluate  each  chromosome,  right? So  we  can  go  through  and  do  it, but  I  want  you  to  use  it  as  a  practice, on  how  to  write  the  objective  function. Based  on  this  co,  All  right. So  based  on  this  coding  here, write  an  objective  function to  evaluate  the  chromosome. All  right?  Think  about  I  go  through the  thinking  or  thought  process on  how  to  formulate  the  objective  function. Okay. So  K  go  the  tree,  right? So  the  map  of  the  United  States, K  go  the  tree,  is  it  possible? It  has  been  shown  that  tree  colors  is  not enough  to  color  the  map  of  the  United  States. It  has  been  shown.  Okay. So  therefore,  you  need  more  color. So  came  with  the  tree, you  cannot  solve  color the  map  of  the  United  States. Now  what  if  k  equal  to  four? Again,  you  can  think about  the  representation. In  this  case,  the  genome  space will  be  one,  two,  three,  four. Then  you  can  write  the  objective  function. So  K  go  to  four  is  possible. In  fact,  it  has  been  proven. It  has  been  proven  that K  to  four  is  enough  to  color.  All  right? Any  given  topology  of regions  is  proven.  Okay? And  you  can  show  just by  your  own  self  illustration. Take  some  maps,  for  example, the  maps  of  the  regions  in  Singapore, right,  all  the  different  regions. Then  see  how  whether three  colors  is  enough  to color  the  different  regions,  and  so  on. Okay.  So  that  is  integral  representation. So  quite  clearly,  right, you  see  how  integral  representation fits  in  into  some  problems. Let's  think  about  Okay. So  let's  go  to  think  about  real  value or  floating  point  representation. So  we  have  looked  at  binary, we  have  looked  at  integer. So  naturally,  another  alternative would  be  real  value  floating  point. So  many  problems  in  for  example, you  in  many  real  world  problems, like  your  control  problems, or  filter  design  problems,  and  so  on. You  are  some  parameters  values  that  you  need to  so  called  decide to  find  the  best  set  of  values, and  these  values  are  real  value. If  you  want  GA  to  find  the  real  values, a  very  natural  tendency is  to  represent  it  as  real  values. Now,  in  the  GA  community, In  the  GA  community, one  of  the  most  common  problems that  is  used  to demonstrate  the  robustness  or flexibility  of  GA is  in  function  optimization. In  function  optimization,  there  are many  benchmark  functions  that are  available  in  literature. Benchmarks  are  a  set of  standard  problems  that are  presented  that  make available  to  everybody. So  when  you  design  an  algorithm, you  use  the  benchmark to  test  your  performance. So  in  the  real  world  problems  also, essentially  the  whole  issue  from a  mathematical  standpoint  is that  it  is  a  mapping,  right? Is  a  function  is  a  mapping of  the  function,  From, the  real  value  space  of  the  n  dimension  to the  to  R  to  a  real  value. So  Let's  say,  for  example, in  this  function  here, this  is  called  the  eclese  function. Go  to  literature  look  for function  optimization  and  all  you  can see  hundreds  of  all  these  benchmarks. If  we  pick  one  function here,  the  clese  function, so  this  is  the  equation of  the  clese  function. Equation  says  f  x  is  to  -20  and  so  on. This  is  the  function. Usually,  in optimization  in  function  optimization, you  want  to  optimize  the  parameters  such that  the  function  value  is either  maximum  or  minimum. You  want  to  find,  for  example, the  maximum  point  or  the  minimum  point. Let's  say  in  this  case  here. In  this  case,  this  is  of  dimension  two. That's  why  we  can  plot  it. So  vertically,  that  will be  the  corresponds  to the  F  x,  the  F  value. So  if  you  were  to  plot  this for  dimension  of  two  or  two  variables, the  horizontal  part  will be  the  two  variables  and  the vertical  will  be  the  so called  the  function  value. So  from  here,  you  can  see  that you're  trying  to  solve  the  minimum  value, trying  to  find  a  minimum  point. Be  this  is  a  benchmark.  All  right. So  if  you  look  in  this  equation  here, it  says  -20  exponential minus  two  square  root  of  one  over  n, and  then  summation  one  to  n.  So this  n  is  the  dimension of  the  problem,  the  dimension. Or  to  put  it  another  way, there  are  two  values, two  variables  you  are  trying  to solve  for  this  particular  representation. So  if  n  equal  to  two, then  there  are  two  variables. For  two  variables,  when  you  plot  this, this  is  what  it  looks  like, and  you're  trying  to  find  a  minimum  point. So  because  it  is  a  benchmark, you  know  the  minimum  point  is  actually  00. Okay.  So  you  so  you  configure  a  GA. Question.  How  big  can  n  B? This  is  a  benchmark.  It  is meant  to  be  so  called  flexible. N  can  be  ten,  n can  be  100  and  can  be  thousand. When  you  do  research,  you  want  to solve  to  demonstrate the  power  of  your  algorithm. You  go  to  hydro  dimension. So  n  can  be  5,000  or  even  1,000. So  that  is  typically the  nature  of  benchmark  problem. So  GA  has  been known  to  solve  this  kind  of  problem. And  quite  often  able  to find  the  optimum  point,  which  is  zero. I  think  in  terms  of  hyper  dimension, and  many  variable  problems  involve many  dimensions  or many  variables  and  could  be  100, meaning  that,  it  is a  function  of  100  variables. Okay. Function  optimization  is  obviously very  suitable  as  a  real  value. You  say,  what's  a  natural  way  or  best  way, or  convenient  way  to represent  the  function  optimization? Assuming  that  all  the  variables are  real  value. Does  that  mean  that  we  only  solve it  as a  real  value  representation?  Not  necessary. So  for  to  be  complete, we  must  also  realize that  even  for  real  value  problem, we  can  also  use so  called  binary  representation. Let's  get  some  notation. Let's  get  some  understanding on  the  notations  here. So  in  your  so  called  real  problem, normally  you  are  trying  to  find  a  value. You're  trying  to  find  a  value between  x  and  y. This  x  here,  x  is  0.1, and  then  y  is  one. Meaning  that  you  are  trying  to  find any  value  between  0.1 and  one,  so  it's  bounded. This  square  bracket here  indicates  the  bounding. So  there's  a  range  from  X  to  Y. So  you're  trying  to  find  a  value  from  X  to  Y, which  is  a  real  value. R  represents  real  value. Now,  if  you  want  to  map  it into  binary  or  discrete  values, then  you  use  a  string  string of  length  L.  What  is  L, L  depends  on  the  accuracy or  resolutions  that  you  want. So  you  must  remember  you're mapping  from  infinite  space? Because  if  it's  real  value  is  infinite, the  number  of  possibilities  is  infinite. So  if  you  go  into  integer, you  go  into  a  discrete  space,  right? So  you  go  into  a  finite  space. So  this  is  a  string, and  then  so  essentially  mapping a  real  value  to  this  string here  A  one  to  AL  and  then  in a  01  space  of  the  L  dimension.  Okay. So  how  do  you  do the  mapping  or  the  conversion? So  so  this  equation  here,  gamma,  right? So  the  mapping,  would  be, let's  say  you  have  a  string, you  have  a  binary  string. How  do  you  convert  it  to  a  real  value? You  can  see  that  from  this  equation  here, you  take  the  general  equation, you  take  x  plus  y  minus  x, there's  a  range  and  then  divide  by the  number  of  steps  to  the  minus  one, and  then  you  sum  up  all  the  bits, and  multiply  each  bit  accordingly. Okay.  So  essentially,  you  can  see  also that  if  you  want  it  to  be  of  high  accuracy, then  L  got  to  be  bigger,  right? You  need  to  use  a  longer  string, so  you  will  want  a  better  resolution. And  too  high,  of  course, that  will  result  in  slower, is  more  cumbersome,  takes  longer  to  evolve. So  you  can  do  a  practice  of  conversion. For  example,  if  I  give  you  a  string A  equal  to  100 let's  say  if  I  give  you  this  string. And  the  real  space  is bounded  by  0.25  and  1.88. What's  the  equivalent  real value  of  this  string? All  right?  Maybe  you  do it  as  a  practice  at  home. Go  back.  Right? Very  simple,  straightforward  exercise. So  as  with  our  binary  and  integer. We  talk  about  mutation  and  crossover. So  in  your  real  value  representation, there's  also  mutation  and  crossover. How  do  you  effect  this  mutation and  crossover  in  real  value? So  let's  start  off  with  mutation.  All  right. So  it's  actually  mutation. Okay?  If  you  have  a  set  of real  value  variables,  right? Real  value  variables  X  one  to  X. So  when  you  mutate, you  should  have  a  new  randomly generate  commerce with  different  values, because  that's  purpose  of  mutation. Normally,  what  happens  is that  you  would  set  a  bound. A  common  or  intuitive  way  of doing  it  would  be  to  set  a  bound, meaning  your  initial  to  your  target, your  target  will  be  bounded by  this  lower  bound  and  then  the  upper  bound. What's  a  new  value randomly  between  lower  bound  and  upper  bound. This  is  like  in  binary, you're  flipping  it  or  in  integers, you  randomly  reset  it. Quite  natural,  when  you  see it  from  the  context  of  it  being  a  real  value, how  do  you  cause  that  kind  of  mutation? Mutation  of  so  called  generating  a  new  value? Okay. So  obviously,  you  can  think  of many  different  methods for  effective  mutation,  right? One  of  the  most  common  way  to  do mutation  is  to  use  a  kind  of  a  distribution. In  your  mutation,  essentially to  get  a  new  value, Xi  is  your  initial  value. Again,  Xi,  this  is a  real  value,  real  value  variable. You  would  take  generate the  new  mutated  value  xi  prime, by  changing  the  value  of  Xi, the  original  one  according  to  a  distribution. A  normal  distribution  from  zero  to  Sigma. Normal  or  gaussian  distribution. So  that  is  that is  quite  typical  also  in  your  real  value. Representation. This  sigma  here  is  your  standard  division. It's  kind  of  like  your  mutation  step  size, So  there's  one  way  to  do  it,  right? So  you  choose  a  random  value according  to  a  distribution. So  mutation. In  real  value,  right, there  could  be  another  interesting  idea on  how  we  can  do  a  mutation. So  if  we  go  to  so  called  let  the  algorithm decide  or  let the  mutation  step  evolve  accordingly. We  call  this  self  adaptive  mutation. So  the  trick  is  very  simple. The  step  size  of  your  mutation is  part  of  the  chromosome. Interesting,  right? So  you  make  the  step  size Sigma  as  part  of  the  chromosome, x  one  to  x  n, that  is  a  variables. Right?  There's  a  variables in  your  representation, what  you're  trying  to  solve  for. So  you  let  that  step  size be  part  of  the  chromosome. Mm.  So  essentially, the  step  size  will  evolve. I  will  evolve  with  the  chromosome. All  right. So  you  can  let  it  evolve  or you  can  have  different  mutation  strategies, you  know,  that  adjust the  step  size  accordingly. So  I  self  adaptive  mutation, how  many  things  you  need  to  evolve? Or  how  many  things  you  need  to so  call  var  change? The  romosome  value,  the, the  allele,  and  then  the  mutation  step  size. There  are  two  things. You  need  to  or  operate  on. So  in  the  cell  addative  mutation, It  is  important  to  note  that  we must  first  mutate  the  Sigma,  right? You  mutate  the  Sigma. So  so  that  the  between  the  two, x  and  Sigma  needs  to  mutate,  right? Between  the  two,  you  need  to mutate  the  Sigma  first. So  it's  important  to  do  the  Sigma  first. Then  only  we  do  the  allele  or  the x  Because  the  both of  it  there  are  two  evaluations  here. One  is  the  so  called the  x  prime  and  the  Sigma  prime. They  are  evaluated  two  times. The  primary  is  x  prime,  right? The  primary  is  x  prime  is  good  if your  F  x  prime  is  good. Secondary,  Sigma  prime  is  good. If  the  x  prime  it  created  is  good. So  the  logic  is  like  this. If  if  you  mutate  x  ws,  right? Based  on  the  x,  you  get  a  Sigma. That  doesn't  mean  a  Sigma  is  good. Right?  Because  you  measure  x, when  you  measure  the  fitness, the  goodness  of  it,  you  use  x. So  therefore,  it  makes  more  sense, you  would  mutate  the  Sigma  first. So  when  you  mutate  the  Sigma, then  you  measure  the  x  x  change  accordingly. If  x  is  good,  then  it  means  a  Sigma  is  good. We  is  not  true  the  other way  around,  you  know, I  x  is  good, doesn't  mean  that  your  Sigma  is  good. So  that  order  is  important  in  this  sense. And  so  there  are  several  crossovers,  right? So  maybe  I  let  you  have  a  break. Right? Maybe  we  come  back  1110. All  right.  Let's  come  back  1110. Let's  take  a  toilet  break. Okay.  Let's  continue. Let  me  just  retract  to last  week  when  I talk  about  the  queens,  right? So  let's  just  spend  1  minute. Okay.  So  in  last  week, I  basically,  I  mentioned  to  you sees  Q  equal  to summation  Delta  Delta  equal  to  one. If  I equal  to  Q  eras. Can  I  just  cancel  this?  Let  me  rewrite  this. One,  I  Q  minus  Q j  equal to  minus  j. There.  And  zero  otherwise. So  I  put  not  equal. So  by  right,  it  should  be  equal. Or  you  can  change  it  the  other  way  round. If  it's  not  equal,  then  this will  be  zero,  and  this  will  be  one. So  somebody  pointed  out  to  me  just  now. Also  the  F  equal  to  one  minus  Q. Over. In  this  case,  last  week,  I  put  27. So  if  you  count,  it  should  be  28. Mitstke. But  the  important  thing  is, I  think  you  understand  how this  is  formulated. Okay.  Go  back  to a All  right. So  talk  still  talking about  real  real  value  representation. All  right.  So  we  say  that  we can  draw  on  based  on  the  distribution. And  we  kind  of  say  that  we can  even  the  step  size  into  the  chromosome. So  this  Sigma  is the  step  size  based  on  the  standard  division. And  I  also  Also, to  take  note  that,  you  know, if  Sigma  is  part  of the  sep  size  is  part  of  the  encoding, then  the  step  the  way  we  do  the  mutation, we  should  be  particular  to mutate  Sigma  first  instead  of  x,  right? So  the  rationale  is if  Sigma  is  good,  you  know, then  it  means  that  your x  the  X  X  prime  is  good, right,  and  not  the  other  way  around. What  about  crossover? All  right.  So  crossover. So  of  course,  we  are talking  about  real  value  here, unlike,  it's  different from  discrete  Discrete, I  just  basically  finite  values. All  right.  Now,  when you  In your  real  value  representation,  you  see, your  mapping,  you're  doing from  your  target  is actually  infinite  number  of possibilities  because  it's real  value.  All  right. Now,  by  the  same  token,  also, you  also  know  that,  you  know, crossing  over  recombination  is  a  form  of  so called  creating  variation  based on  the  parents,  right? One  way  to  create  the  kind of  variation  such  that  is still  inherits  part  of the  characteristic  of  the  parents  would  be like  some  kind  of  interpolation,  right? So  intuitively,  what  we  may  be  looking  at  as possible  recombination  would  be like  operations  that  creates  that  kind of  offspring  that  takes  on something  in  between  both  the  parents,  right? So  we  can  consider what  we  call  the  amet  type  of  recombination. In  the  aromatic  type  of  recombination, we  choose  a  so  called  a  value  Alpha. Alpha  is  like  a  cross  point  thing. In  this  aromatic  cross  over, we  just  take  z  as  determined  by the  Alpha  Alpha  x  i  plus  one  minus  Alpha. Alpha  is  any  value  that's between  zero  and  0-1. So  how  do  we come  up  with  this  value  of  Alpha? Keep  it  the  same  as  normal. Or  we  can  make  it variable  depending on  the  age  of  the  population. We  change  Alpha  accordingly  on the  way  we  pick  at  random  every  time. Every  time  Alpha,  we  just  change  accordingly. So  the  type  of  crossing  over  involving real  value  could  be at  one  point,  single  arithmetic  crossover. You  just  cross  over  involving  one  point. For  example,  Alpha  is  0.5, so  you  just  pick  a  point,  this  point  here. So  0.5  takes  on  0.5  times  0.8. Based  on  the  previous  equation, Alpha  x  i  plus  one  minus  Alpha  y  i. So  you  take  Alpha  as  0.5  0.5  times  0.8 0.4  plus  one  minus  Alpha, which  is  0.5  0.5  times 0.2  0.1,  so  you  get  0.5. Quite  straightforward  in  a  single  point. You  could  You  could  have  so called  simple  arithmetic  crossover, where  you  break  it  up  is  multi  point,  right? So  let's  say  you  have  parents  x  and  y, so  you  just  pick  a  random  gene. And  then  after  that,  you  mix  the  value. So  anything, let's  say  this  is your  your  cutting  point  here. So  anything  that's  beyond let's  say  this  point  here, like  0.7  0.8  0.9,  right? And  on  the  bottom  1.3  0.2  and  0.3. So  0.5,  you  take  0.5  times  0.7, 0.35,  and  then  0.3  times  0.5  is  0.15. So  at  them,  you  get  0.5. So  quite  easy  to  see. So  this  is  for  Alpha  equal  to  50.5. So  many  of  the  researchers or  people  who  design  algorithm, it's  quite  common  to  use  Alpha  0.5,  right? Now,  that  may  not  necessarily  be  the  case. So  we  can  also choose  a  different  value  of  Alpha. So  when  you  do  a  practice,  you  know, so  how  do  you  if  Alpha  is  going  0.3, what  will  be  the  resulting  value? So  I  think  quite  easily, you  can  see,  right?  If  this  is  0.3. So  you  have  0.7. So  anything  that  is  after  this. So  you  go  Alpha. 0.3  times  0.0  0.3  times  0.3, is  0.09  and  then  0.3  plus  times  0.7  is  0.21, 0.2  plus  0.090  0.3  and  so  on. So  you  should  be  able  to  work  it  out, regardless  of  the  value  of  Alpha. So  we  can  also  apply  it  to the  whole  the  whole  chromosome. Before  that,  we  cut  out  at  a  certain  point. Now  you  apply  0.5. We  just  apply  the  so  called  the  crossover accordingly  across  the  whole  chromosome. So  quite  easy  to  see. Now,  I  want  you  to maybe  I  can  ponder  and  ask  you  a  question, you  know,  from  the  crossover, let's  say  you  have  two  parents,  right? So  what  are  the  possible value  for  the  offspring? For  example,  let's  say  you have  parent  1.3,  p  2.7. What  will  be  the  possible  value  based on  the  three  operations that  you've  seen  so  far? What  will  be  the  possible values  of  the  offspring? You  answer  my  question? 0.3  0.7. What  will  be  the  range  of value  for  the  offspring? Regardless  of  the  value  of  Alpha  you  choose? The  value  of  the  offspring  will be  anywhere  in  between. In  a  way  that  is  supposedly the  crossover  that  inherits from  both  the  parents. Is  that  necessarily  the  case? Why  not  just  somewhere  near  above? Is  there  a  way  to  do  it such  that  we  encompass a  greater  possibilities  in terms  of  what  the  offspring  can  take? This  is  where  we  leads us  to  another  type  of  crossover, which  is  very  interesting. We  call  it  the  blending  crossover, the  blending  crossover. In  the  blending  crossover, again,  we  consider  two  parents. Two  p  x  and  y. Let's  assume  any  of  the  variable  or  the  gene. The  value  is  such  that  x  is  less  than  Y. S  to  make  things  a little  bit  less  complicated. We  assume  x  i  to  be  less  than  y, so  that  d  is  positive. Because  xi  is  less  than  YI. So  Di  is  y  minus  x, so  it's  always  positive. So  you  can  see  DI  is like  the  distance  between  the  x  and  y. The  distance  between  x  and  the  y. Okay.  So  we're  going  to  so  called  decide, using  that  range  as  a  reference. And  then  we  randomly  sample  set  I  All  right. The  new  value  for  the  crossover  to  be xi  minus  Alpha  di  between  the  range, the  new  value,  right, the  new  value  c  is  between the  range  c  minus  Alpha  D, and  x  i  p  Alpha  D.  So  again, you  should  note  that this  square  means  the  range. So  my  new  value  of  after  the  crossover, the  new  value  for  the  offspring is  between  this  range. This  is  a  random  Okay. So  because  that  Alpha is  a  value  that  you  will  choose, you  can  make  it  adaptive  as  you  go  along. So  these  are  the  difference, the  type  of  crossover  operations that  you  can  see,  okay? The  blending  one  is a  little  bit  more  interesting. It  kind  of  expand the  offspring  horizon  a  little  bit  more. Basing  on  the  distance between  the  two  parents. So  when  you  put  it  in  perspective, single  aromatic  is one  point  specific  one  point. So  you  can  see  the  possibility  of your  offspring  as  just from  the  set  four  possible  points, if  it's  a  single  point. S  one,  S  two,  S  three,  so. The  simple  arithmetic  or whole  arithmetic.  What's  the  range? Remember,  this  is  your  X  and  Y, and  I  think  you're probably  convinced  that  x  y so  far  based  on  the  arithmetic  operation is  only  between  the  range  of  the  parents. So  the  bounding  box  is this  and the  interesting  or  innovative one  would  be  the  blending. So  with  the  blending, this  will  be  the  possibility of  your  of  spring. All  right. So  the  different  types of  operations  that  you  can see  in  your  crossing over  involving  real  value,  right? So  again,  you  should  note, it's  dealing  with discrete  values  and  real  values. Real  values  is  continuous  space, right  like  0.12  34, you  know,  infinite  number  of  possibilities. So  the  way  we  deal  with discrete  and  real  values  has  to have  that  capacity  right to  effect  the  kind of  variations  that  we  want. Now,  in  general,  nothing  to  stop  us  from, you  know,  doing  multi  parent,  okay? So  the  conventional  way  is  just take  two  parents  and  then carry  out  the  recombination. But  in  GA,  strictly  speaking, I  think  in  general, we  can  extend  to even  more  than  two  parents,  right? In  mathematics  or  algorithm, anything  is  possible. So  another  way  of saying  is  that  we  should  not restrict  our  possibility  based on  what  we  see  in  real  life. Because  our  goal  in algorithm  is  to  solve  problem. As  long  as  we  solve  problem, we  have  inspiration  from  nature. But  then  in  our  real  algorithm, our  implementation  should  be  able  to  with the  main  objective  of solving  the  problem  itself. Here,  let's  say  just a  simple  quick  illustration, involving  three  parents, we  call  it  a  type  one  type. You  could  take  three  parents. When  you  clear  the  offspring, you  take  the  first  one,  you  do a  so  called  a  diagonal  combination. The  first  offspring  from  the  first, it  inherits  this  strand. The  second  So  you  go  along  diagonally. Here,  you  get  this, and  then  the  third  strain  comes  from  this. And  then  the  second  one,  you start  from  the  second,  right. So  you  go  diagonally,  right? So  the  ch  number  two, you  take  the  first  one  from  the  second, and  then  go  diagonal,  here. And  then  finally,  the  last  part  comes  from, so  you  wrap  around  to  to  the  first. The  generalizes  the  one  point  crossover. We  call  this  the  simple  type  one. Another  way  is  just  extend multi  parent  to  the  aromatic  type. Remember  we  did  the  aromatic type,  the  different  type. So  aromatic  crossover. We  can  also  extend  it to  multi  parent  recombination. No. In  recent  years,  We  begin  to explore  many  problems  that are  discrete  in  nature,  right? That  involves  the  ordering or  the  sequencing  of  things. For  example, in  your  traveling  salesman  problem. Traveling  salesman  problem, the  problem  specifies  that  you  must find  a  sequence  of the  salesmen  visiting  each and  every  city  once  and  only  once. What's  a  good  sequence? A  good  sequence  is  one  that gives  you  a  minimum  cost, which  is  the  most  straightforward  way is  to  measure  the  distance  and  so  on. Quite  clearly,  we  see that  many  problems  in rail  are  of  that  nature. Your  end  quiz  is  another  example. So  you  want  to  solve  an  end  quiz  problem. If  you  want  to  the  way  the  quiz  are  range. Well,  the  sequence  and ordering  is  part  of  the  consideration. Okay.  So  many  examples  you  can think  of  that  falls  into  this  category. Now,  of  course,  we  can  use  binary coding  for  this  type  of  problem. Not  to  say  we  can't  use  binary  coding. But  the  issue  is,  is  it the  most  convenient  or  efficient  way? As  you  can  see  from  here, there's  another  alternative,  which is  a  permutation  representation? Okay.  What  is  the  permutation? Permutation  connotes  arrangement  of  things, to  arrange  it  and usually  in  robosomes  or  for  our  purpose, it  will  involve  integral  value. For  example,  in  your  en  queens  problem or  eight  queens  problem, you  have  eight  integer  value  one, two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight. A  permutation  will  be any  one  of  those  arrangements, such  that  all  the  values  are  different. In  your  eight  queens  problem. Eight  gene  permutation. It's  a  permutation  because  each  of the  value  1-8  occurs  once  and  only  once. There's  a  permutation  string. Of  course,  you  know  why  because  we have  the  constraints  of  one  en, only  one  row,  and  one  column. Making  it  into  a  permutation becomes  very  efficient  because naturally  we  already  satisfy the  constraint  of the  no  two  queens  on one  column  and  no  two  queens  on  one  row. And  then  beyond  that,  all  we  need  is just  to  solve  for  the  one  way. It  doesn't  violate  the  diagonal  conflict. So  always  a  good  example  to use  is  also your  traveling  salesman  problem,  right? So  the  traveling  salesman  problem can  be  a  P  t  problem. We  saw  from  our  earlier  analysis, travel  to  find  the  optimum  for  TSP. That  can  be  P  t. And  usually  the  objective is  to  find  the  minimum  distance. Let's  see  if  we  for this  traveling  salesman  problem  here. In  order  to  solve  it  and  there  are  30  cities, then  one  good  way  is  to  represent it  as  integers  1-30. Then  the  order  of  the  genes  that will  represent  the  sequence  of  travel. So  what  you  can see  is  that  it  is  very  natural. It's  very  natural  that when  we  see  this  problem  here, when  we  see  the  traveling  salesman  problem, it's  very  natural  for  us to  think  of  accommodation of  30  numbers  if  they  are  30  cities. Okay.  Of  course,  along  with  that  also, if  it  is  a  permutation, then  the  way  we  deal  with it  in  order  to  create  that  kind  of variation  will  also  have  to  be  a  little bit  different  or  will  have  to  be  different. For  one,  our  operation  would  have  to  be such  that  when  we  operate  on  it, it  should  still  make  it into  a  permutation,  right? That  is  the  general  rule. Okay. So  mutation  we  see we  are  we  say  so  many  times  already, we  know  what  mutation  is  all  about. So  in  binary,  we saw  mutation  just  as flipping  of  zero  and  one. Integ  is  like  also  flipping,  right, but  then  there's a  little  bit  more  flexibility or  different  ways  you  can  do  it. Permutation  strain,  how  do  we  do  mutation? Mutation  always  involve  only  one  patent. And  because  it's  a  permutation, you  can  see  that  this  is a  permutation,  c123  456789. So  if  I  were  to  do  a  so  called  mutation. One  simple  way, is  just  to  do  a  swap  mutation. I  take  one  gene,  randomly  flip  it. Let's  say  it  says  flip  to  number  five, two  flip  to  number  five. So  I  flip  to  number  five. But  in  doing  that  quite  clearly, I  need  to  go  to  where number  five  is  and  then  flip  it  to  two. And  I  think  it's  quite  logical  you  see  why because  we  still  need to  maintain  that  permutation. So  there's  a  point  about  permutation  string. Another  way  to  do  mutation, we  take  a  value. Random.  Let's  say  you  have  a  string  of  20, randomly  pick  two  point. Then  after  that,  bring  them  together. Let's  say  I  randomly  pick  two  and  five, and  then  I  bring  them  together. There's  also  another  form of  mutation,  possible  mutation. We  can  also  do  scramble. So  just  pick  a  range of  genes  and  then  scramble  it. So  in  this  figure  here, you  say  two,  three,  four,  five. All  right?  That's  the  strain. So  I  scramble  it  randomly, then  I  get  three,  52. So  you  see  the  effect is  to  create  that  kind  of randomness  that  affects the  sequence  also,  right? Not  just  the  value,  but  also  the  sequence. Another  form.  Inversion.  Take  one  strand, two,  three,  four,  five, and  just  in  what you  can  see  in  your  inversion. We  kind  of  like  preserves the  adjacency  information. It  changes  the  so  called  order, but  not  as  much  as  what  you  would have  done  if  it  is  a  random  type  of  mutation. Okay. Crossover  is  a  little  bit  more  interesting. There  are  more  options  to  think  about. So  essentially  crossover,  we  all  know. The  simple  crossover  procedure  is  say  to take  a  crossover  sign  and  then do  a  swap  between  the  string. That  is  what  we  know  crossover  is. So  in  a  pmation  string, there  are  more  variations  of  what we  can  do  in  a  crossover. And  remember  that  this  is  a  permutation. So  the  order  and  the  sequencing.  All  right. So  what  we  want  to  propagate  is,  for  example, from  parent  to  offering, would  be  quality  that  has a  good  sequence  or  order. That  would  be  one  of  the  consideration,  okay? So  the  first  idea  of  crossover, very  simple,  we  choose  a  crossover  strand. So  I  can  go  straight  to  the  next  slide. Okay?  The  steps  are  all  as  shown, but  if  we  use the  next  line  and show  by  means  of  an  example, So  we  decide  on  to  cross  over. For  example,  we  want  to  do crossover  involving  these  four  genes  here. These  four  genes  on  the  shaded  box. So  to  generate  of  spring,  we  take, for  example,  based  on, we  say  five,  six,  seven. Then  what  about  the  remaining  one? The  remaining  one  will  be  dictated  by the  the  order  of  the  second  parent. According  to  the  second  parent, normally  we  start  creating the  offspring  from  here onwards  on  the  right  hand  side. So  you  look  at  the  second  parent. The  next  one  is  one. So  we  pick  pick  one  here. Then  after  that,  four. But  four  is  already  here. So  we  skip  four. Then  you  wrap  around,  and  say  nine, nine  is  next,  nine  goes  here. Then  after  that,  three,  three, here  and  so  on. Quite  clearly,  What  is very  clear  is  that  from this  cross  over  operation  here, the  offspring  inherits  part  of  this  strand, 4567  from  one,  and the  order  inherits  the  order of  the  remaining  genes on  how  they  should  be  arranged. Intuitively, we  can  see  what  is  happening  here, what  crossover  is  trying  to  do. Quite  a  simple  cross  over  procedure. The  other  type  of  cross, what  we  call  the  PM  X very  commonly  used  operations of  cross  over  involving  permutation  str. Okay. So  as  always,  there  are two  parents  in  P  one  and  P  two. Okay. So  we  choose  a  segment for  cross  over.  All  right. So  the  steps  involved. Choose  a  random  segment  from  P  one, and  then  starting  from  first  cross  point, look  for  parents  in  next  segment of  P  two  that  have  not  been  copied. Now,  when  you  choose  a  segment, there's  a  chance  some  of  it  will  be  the  same. So  after  you  choose  aceptment,  right? You'll  find  in  your  parent  too  which  of the  points  that  have  not  been  copied. And  then  after  that,  from each  of  these,  point. Look  in  the  offspring  to  see  what element  J  has  been  copied  in  this  place. So  essentially,  you want  to  find  the  matching. So  that  strand  there,  right? There's  a  high  choice and  maybe  partially  match. You  want  to  find  the  matching. Because  if  it's  match, then  you  don't  have  to  so call  reprodu  it  again. And  then  subsequently, you  so  do  a  mapping  based  on  parent  two, then  you  decide  where the  remaining  is  going  to  be. Let's  use  an  example  to  illustrate. All  right. So  in  this  example  here, we  have  two  parents  123-45-6789, and  then  937826  51f. So  let's  say  I  decide using  these  two  parents  here, we  want  to  do  a  crossover  involving this  strand  of  four  genes,  right? So  based  on  this  force,  genes  here. So  I  take  on  4567  based  on  parent  one. So  parent  one  will  pass  on the  property  based  on this  substra  strand,  4567. Now,  you  would  then look  at  subsequently  4567. All  right.  You  will  see  that  the  five and  the  five  and  the six  in  this  4567,  right  4567. Five  and  six. So  this  five  here,  right? Because  this  five  already  in  the  first  grade, so  you  do  a  mapping, say  go  from  here  to  here. Seven. And  then  map  it  back  to  so  called  T  two. So  this  four,  five, six  sorry,  I  missed  the  step. So  let  me  rewind  a  little  bit  rewind,  right? So  we  go  from  two. Two  is  not  in  567. T  is  not  in  567. So  we  go  2-2  to  five. And  then  five  goes  to  here. And  then  five,  then  goes  to  seven, and  then  seven  is  here. Meaning  to  say  that  two, will  take  this  place here,  which  is  here,  two. And  the  other  one  that  is not  already  occurred  is  egg. Egg  is  not  four  part  of  4567. So  you  take  egg, egg  goes  to  four, and  then  four  goes  here. So  therefore,  it  means  that  egg  will be  placed  here.  Okay? Because  two  and  so essentially  to  put  it  in  perspective, you  say,  these  two  subtrand  here. They  are  partially  matched. Right?  They  are  partially  matched. So  the  matching  is  on  six  and  five,  right? Six  and  five.  Okay? So  six  and  five  matches. So  what  is  not  matched  is  your  eight  and  two. So  you  got  to  find  a  place  for  eight  and  two. So  two  goes  two  to  five, and  then  27,  and  then  it  comes  here. We'll  bring  two  to  disposition  of  seven. And  then  line  plus  eight  is  also  not  matched. So  we're  going  to  bring  it  out  to  four. That's  step  number  two. And  the  step  number  three. You  got  to  fill  up  the  remaining. You  need  to  fill  up  the  remaining. So  this  is  still  empty. So  according  to  this  parent  two  here, this  is  one,  so  I  fill  up  one. And  then  four  is  already  done, and  then  you  go  nine. So  nine  goes  here, and  then  you  go  three  goes  here. Partially  matched,  partially matched  comes  from the  fact  that  these  two substring  There  are  some of  the  so  called  genes, they  are  partially  matched. Then  you  just  work  on  those  that  are unmatched  and  see  where it  goes  in  the  offspring. The  final  result,  after your  partially  matched  crossover, this  is  the  offspring  that  we  get. This  is  just  one  offspring. Now  the  other  offspring that  comes  about  would  be based  on  inheriting  e265  from  parent  two. Let's  say  if  I  inherits  8265  from  parent  two. What  will  be  the  remaining  values of  the  gene  for  the  second  offspring. Maybe  you  take  1  minute. And So  you  can see  from  these  two  substring  here. So  again,  six  and  five  are  matched,  right? So  the  ones  that  are  not matched  are  four  and  seven. So  you  start  from  the  four  and  seven. All  right.  Four  start  from  four. Four  is  not  match. So  four  goes  eight, right,  and  then  eight  goes  to  here. So  that's  where  your  new  position  of  four. And  then  after  that,  seven, Seven  where  does  seven  goes, seven  goes  to  five, and  then  five  maps  into  here, and  then  after  that  from  five, maps  to  two,  and  then  two  back  to  here. So  that's  where  your  seven  should  go. And  then  the  remaining  of it  will  be  filled  up according  to  the  order of  the  remaining  genes. So  you  always  start  on the  right  hand  side  beyond  the  string. So  this  is  what  we  get  as  a  final  outcome. So  there  are  two  offspring  that  can  be generated  from  this  partially  match. So  again,  the  term  partially match  is  based  on  of  course, this  string  is  a  little  bit  short,  right. But  of  course,  you  can imagine  this  could  be  a  problem of  let's  say  50  genes. So  the  steps  may  be  by  far, I  think  in  your  permutation  string, your  PMX  is  one  of  the most  quite  commonly  used, right  because  it  generates a  more  interesting  kind  of  offspring. And  we  can  also  have  think  of  another  way. So  the  concept  of another  form  of  cross  over  comes  from the  idea  of identifying  cycles  between  chromosomes. The  chromosomes,  of  course, the  representation  of  the  chromosome, both  are  based  on  certain  representation. So  for  example,  if  it  is a  integer  permutation  of  queen. Both  the  parents  have  values  as  from  128. So  in  this  approach  here, we  identify  the  cycles of  the  chromosome,  right? So  Of  course,  we  can  go through  the  steps  on  what  to  do, but  it  is  much  easier  to just  take  a  look  at  the  example  to  see. So  the  two  chromosome  involved. Again,  the  two  parents, 123-45-6789,  and  then  937-82-6514, use  the  same  strings. So  what  is  cycle,  right? We  can  see  in  these  two  chromosome  here, there  are  three  cycles. The  first  cycle  goes  like  this  1-9. 1-9,  and  then  from  nine  back  to  parent  one, and  then  nine  goes  to  four. Four  goes  to  four  here, and  then  four  to  eight. And  then  eight  goes maps  into  disposition  of  parent  one, and  then  eight  packs  to  one, and  then  you  return back  to  the  first  gen,  which  is  one. So  you  start  out  from  one, and  then  you  end  up  in  one. That  is  called  a  cycle. Right?  A  cycle  is  a  sequence  or mapping  that  brings  it  back to  the  original  starting  point. So  there's  a  cycle.  So  the  first  cycle involves  those  genes  that  are  shaded. So  the  genes  that  are  shaded has  already  in  cycle  one. Is  there  another  cycle? Well,  obviously,  there  are  because  there are  some  more  genes  that  are  not  shaded. So  you  go  to  number  two, you  go  to  number  two. So  two  goes  to  three, three  goes  to  three  here, and  then  three  to  seven. Seven  mess  back  to  parent  one, and  then  seven  to  five, and  then  five  to  five, p  one,  and  then five  to  two,  and  then  back  to  two. That's  another  cycle. Okay. So  one  cycle,  two  cycle, now  only  six  is  left,  right? Is  there  another  cycle? Well,  you  bet  there  is. No,  six  and  six  forms  a  cycle. Okay. So  the  whole  idea  of  cycle  crossover, it  is  a  cross  over  operation. So  you  exchange  the  cycles. So  once  you  identify  the  cycles, you  just  exchange  the  cycle to  generate  the  two  offspring. All  right.  So  the  first  one, maybe  the  first  offspring, you  say,  Okay,  the  first  parent contributes  the  first  cycle. And  then  the  second,  right, the  remaining  And  then  the  second  offspring, right,  takes  the  so called  the  second  cycle  of  parent  one. And  then  and  then, you  know,  the  other  one  comes from  parent  two  and  so  on. That  is  your  cycle  crossover. We've  seen  simple  crossover, what  we  call  the  order  one  crossover. And  then  subsequently  we progress  towards a  little  more  interesting  crossover. The  last  one  we  talked  about  was  permutation, and  this  one  is  a  cycle. There  may  be  some  problem where  cycle  crossover will  will  be  so  called  advantages. It  all  depends  on  the  property  or the  type  of  problems  that  we  are  solving. Let's  take  a  look  at  one more  involving  permutation  representations. Okay.  So  when  you look  at  the  traveling  salesman  problem, right? So  you  let  me  just  revert  to  Pen. So  if  I  were  to  draw  you,  right? So  in  the  graph,  This  is  a  e. Quite  often,  when  we talk  about  crossing  over, sorting  properties  and  we  we  tend  to  work on  the  value  of  the  allele  itself. The  value  of  the  gene. And  we  alter  the  value  of  the  genes. Now,  in  this  here,  in this  last  crossover  that I'm  going  to  talk  about, it's  interesting  it  looks  at  the,  the  e. In  the  graph,  what  is  an e.  H  is  this  connection  here,  right? If  you  represent  each  gene  as  a  vertex, so  this  is  H.  This  is an  interesting  operator  because  it works  on  the  H  itself,  right? In  the  crossover  or  recombination, we  first  create  a  a  table  of  edges. You  create  a  table  of  edges, and  how  many  nodes  are  there? There  are  89  gs, so  you  have  one  element  of  one, two,  345  6789. So  you  have  eight  elements. Now  you're  going  to  list  down  the  edges. If  you  look  at  element  number  one, the  sequence  according  to this  chain  is  one  to  two. So  you  put  down  two.  There's  a  1-2. Okay. And  then  you  you  know, in  some  problems,  I  get tri  sales  prom  is  a  closed  circuit,  right? When  you  reach  the  last  point, then  it  comes  back  to  the  beginning. So  in  next  sense,  from mosome  number  one  to  nine, there's  also  a  H,  so  we  list  it  down.  Nine. And  then  the  second  parent or  second  chromosome, where  is  one?  This  is  one. What  are  the  ages  for  for one  in  the  second  parent,  five  and  four. So  you  have  five  and  four. Then  you  go  to  element  number  two, we'll  do  a  couple  more, and  then  I  think  the idea  will  be  quite  clear. You  go  to  two.  Two  is  one, three,  Hages  are  one, three,  and  then  is  two, 68.  Then  you  go  to  three. You  have  three,  two,  four, and  then  79,  quite  clear. Let's  jump  a  little  bit  to  six. L  et's  jump  to  element  number  six. You  go  to  two  element  number six,  this  is  number  six. Then  you  have  57. We  put  57. And  then  you  go  to  the  second  parent  625. This  is  two,  but five  is  also  common  in  parent  one. We  put  a  plus.  It  occurs in  both  so  called  the  parents. We  use  a  plus  to  denote  it. We  have  created  a  table  of  all  the  ages, involving  the  two  chromosomes  or  two  parents. Let's  execute  the  recombination  based  on  age. So  to  create  this  offspring, it  is  a  form  of  a  constructive  approach. By  constructive  what  I  mean  is  that  you build  you  build  up  the  string  one  by  one. The  constructs just  a  constructing  a  solution. Many  algorithms  are  so called  constructive  kind  of  algorithms. Right?  For  example,  many  of  your  so called  your  deterministic  approach. The  way  you  look  for  solution, is  you  build  it  up  until you  get  a  complete  solution. So  you  start  maybe a  initial  random  point and  then  after  that  from  there, you  build  it  up  until you  get  a  complete  solution. So  your  whole  age  recombination  is a  form  of  a  reconstruction  index  sense. Initially,  you sick  any  initial  random  starting  point, and  then  set  the  current element  equal  to  entry. And  then  the  third  step,  remove all  references  from  table. So  you  must  maintain  a  list  of  table, checklist,  you  know,  update the  table  accordingly. And  then  after  decide  based  on the  ages  based  on  some  rules,  right? Let's  quickly  take  a  get  the  rules. So  once  you  have  a  gene, you  pick  a  point,  then  you  want  to decide  what's  the  next  age  to  choose? Because  now  you're  in  this  node  here, you  have  different  ages,  you  can  choose. What  are  the  rules  to  decide which  age  or  which  path  you  want  to  take? The  rule  goes  like  this. If  there  is  a  common  e, pick  that  to  be  the  next  one. Common  age,  you  saw  in  the  table, the  plus  one,  there's  a  common. Otherwise,  pick  the  entry  in  the  list, which  itself  has  the  shortest  list. You  target  among  let's say  you  have  several  options, you  target  those  shores  list. And  then  if  they  are  the  same, both  also  have  equal  number  of  ages, you  just  randomly  pick  one. So  when  you  reach an  element  that  has  no  more  in  the  list, you  just  randomly  decide on  the  new  element  to  go  to. So  it's  clearer  to  see  an  illustration. The  table  we  have  graded  for the  two  chromosomes  goes  like  this. This  is  the  table. And  let's  say  you  start  from  one. You  can  start  from  anywhere. There  are  eight  points  you  can  start  out. You  can  start  from  anywhere. You  start  from  one  and  from  one, one  is  the  ages  for  one  is  two, five,  four,  and  nine. So  254  and  nine. So  the  first  one  you  choose  is  one,  right? So  that's  your  solution  now  consists  of  one. Right? It's  like  your  traveling  exalement,  say, let's  say  you  start  with  five, then  initially  your  solution  on  here  is  five. So  here,  initially,  our  result, the  partial  result  is  only  one. So  now  we're  going  to  decide. F  one,  you  can  go  to  two, five,  four  or  nine. Right.  So  you  go  to  number  two. You  go  to  age  number  two. How  many  ages?  T,  68,  368. Why  not  include  one  because one  already  taken  care  of? Okay. And  then  you  go  to  number  five. Number  five,  where's  number  five,  46  plus. All  right?  Again,  one discovered  because  one  is  ready  in  sion. And  then  you  go  to  number  4359. And  then  you  go  to  number  nine. You  go  to  number  nine,  three,  48. Here  in,  you  have  from  number  one, you  go  to  number  two,  there are  three  edges,  368. And  then  if  you  go  to  number  five, there  are  four  and  six  plus, and  then  you  go  to  number  four, there  are  359,  three  edges, and  then  to  number  nine,  348,  three  edges. So  which  one  is  the  shortest. According  to  our  rule, we  choose  the  one,  the  shortest,  right. So  the  shortest  is  number  five. So  four  and  six  plus, so  you  choose  number  five.  All  right. You  go  to  now  your  solution  one  and  five. So  you  strike  off number  five  from  your  table. Up  to  this  point  here, you  can  strike  off  one  and  five. Right?  And  then  you  have  from  five, four  and  six,  right? 44  and  six  are  not  here  yet. So  you  go  to  four,  six, Joos  a  common.  No. So  four  and  six  i  4-6  plus. So  you  go  for  six  plus. And  then  from  six.  You  have  two  and  seven. Two  and  seven.  Five  is ally  taken  care  of.  So  you  go  to  two. You  have  368,  and  then  seven,  you  have  368. Both  also  the  same.  So  you  random. You  can  randomly  choose  between  the  two. Okay. So  quite  simple,  right,  the  idea. So  again,  I  emphasize,  you  know, different  the  so  called  the  crossover has  different  attributes  of  what  it's trying  to  emphasize  or  what it's  trying  to  pass  on,  you  know? So  the  last  one  year,  the  age  recombination, if  you  see  from  the  context  of a  graph  problem  like a  traveling  salesmen  prom, it  is  trying  to  so called  effect  changes  on  the, the  recombination  based  on the  age  properties  of  the  chromosomes. Okay. So  pretty  good,  we  have done  four  representations,  right? And  that  is  quite  quite  complete.  Okay. Now,  let's  do  one  more. There's  another  type  of  representation. Many  problems  are  very elegantly  described  or  represented  as  tree. So  it's  a  kind  of  problem where  you  want  to  find  a  property  of  a  tree, you  know,  that  is  the  most optimized  or  gives you  the  best  representation. This  tree  could  be  like  a  program.  A  program. So  if  you  represent  it  as  a  tree, that  means  that  you're  evolving  a  program. Or  it  could  be  a  structure, or  it  could  be  a  finite  state  machine or  whatever  it  may  be. So  representation  as  t  is  also  very  elegant. Now,  if  let's  say we  consider  Tree  representation. Let's  say  we  want  to represent  this  formula  here. We  want  to  represent  this  aromatic  formula, two  Pi  plus  blah, blah,  blah,  and  this  equation. We  can  let's  say  represent this  logical  formula  or  program. We  want  to  represent this  program,  for  example. These  are  possibilities  of what  a  tree  can  be  used  for. We  all  know  the  rule  of  mathematics. You  go  those  paratss has  higher  precedence  order. Accordingly,  this  this  equation  here. At  the  root  of  it,  you  have  your  plus. And  then  there  is  so called  this  product  here, and  the  22  and  the  Pi. And  then  the  other one  on  the  right  hand  side  of your  plus  here  will  be this  remaining  formula.  Right. So  this  value. So  the  tree  has has  a  node  and  then the  node  has  leaves,  right? So  at  the  end  of  it,  there's  a  terminal. At  the  end  of  it,  there's  a  terminal. You  can  see  in  your  tree representation  in  this  case  here, the  terminal  represent  the  values,  right? The  terminal  represent  the  values. So  the  notes,  the  non  terminal, that  will  be  the  operators  or  operators. Okay.  So  this  is  a  illustration on  how  you  may  represent  the  tree. Same  thing. Let's  say  this  the  left  hand  side implies  the  right  hand  side. This  implication,  so  you  can build  a  tree  to  represent  this. Your  algorithm  could  be evolving  a  logical  structure. Again,  the  terminal  represent the  so  called  the  symbols  or  the  values. I  think  by  now  you  get  the  idea of  the  tree  representation,  uh. Okay.  So  let's  say you  have  this  procedure  here, so  we  can  actually draw  a  tree  to  represent  this. So  when  we  deal  with  values,  right? When  we  deal  with  values, it's  quite  natural  when  we create  the  kind  of  variation  of  operation, you  would  expect  the  operation  or it's  normal that  our  operation  changes  the  value. For  example,  one  to  three  or  zero  to  one, 1.2  to  2.8,  you  know, we  dealing  with  values. Now,  in  this  case,  we  are  dealing  with, you  know,  it's  literally  the  structure. So  therefore,  your  operations be  such  a  w  that  it manipulates  of  courses  variations in  the  tree  structures. So  that's  what  you  are  trying  to  do. So  your  tree normally  the  tree  itself,  normally, you  have  a  terminal  set  terminal  set, terminal,  I  told  you, the  values  and  so  on, and  also  the  function. Essentially  what  you  have to  think  about  in  your  tree  here, you  got  to  define  this  set  of values  and  also  the  functions  and  so  on. Now,  when  you  go to  your  actual  value  itself.  All  right? Your  actual  implementation. So  when  you  mutate  when  you  do  cross  over, you  are  mutating  crossing over  the  tree  itself,  right? So  mutation,  mutation.  In  this  case,  yeah. All  right.  So  when  you  mutate, you  mutate,  let's  say a  part  of  the  tree,  a  point  in  the  tree. And  then  from  there,  you  create  another  tree. For  example,  as  a  result  of this  mutation  here,  right? So  you  get  another  tree  like  this. Okay. So  So  here  we  mutate, and  the  mutation  of  it  makes  this into  let's  say  a so  called  y  into  a  terminal  value. So  we  get  a  result  of  a  mutation,  right? O  a  new  te  structure. And  of  course,  the  parameters is  quite  similar,  right? Quite  similar  to  we have  a  mutation  probability  and  so  on. So  the  whole  idea  of  so  called  evolving, there's  this  area,  what  we  call the  genetic  programming.  All  right. So  genetic  programming  very  likely  you'll  be looking  at  t.  Now, quickly  about  the  recombination. So  recombination  is  about  exchanging between  substring  earlier  on. In  this  case  here,  what  are  you  exchanging? So  you  have  parents, you're  just  exchanging  the  subtree. You  exchanging  the  subtree. So  Quick  illustration  as  in  this  figure  here. So  you  take  two  parents  and  then  you take  a  subtree  and  then  do  an  exchange. Okay. So  there's  a  whole  idea of  recombination,  right? And  I  think  this is  probably  a  good  point  to  stop,  right? So  today  we  did  pretty  good. We  cover  all  the  representation. We  see  the  repertoire  of the  operations  involving  mutation and  crossover  for the  different  types  of  representation. So  this  will  be  a  good  point  to  stop. Right?  So  I  think  some  of  you are  asking  me  or  asking  me, you  know,  Chris,  does  it cover  next  week  lecture? So  I  haven't  set  the  quiz  yet, so  I'll  make  it  such  that it  won't  include  the  next  week  lecture. So  next  week,  I may  finish  up  with  a  little  bit  more, and  then  I  will  maybe  use some  time  to  look  at some  of  the  previous  questions, you  know,  just  to  give  you a  little  bit  of  flavor of  what  kind  of  questions. Previous  question  more  on the  exam  time  of  questions.  Okay. So  I  will  see  you  in  class. And  then  after  that  evening  at  9:30, I'll  see  you  for  the  quiz.  See  you  next  week. I  have  the  two  questions. The  first  of  question  is  of
