Good  morning. This  is  the  fourth  week  of  lecture. So  next  week, Pro  will  be  will be  continuing  for  the  remaining  of  the  weeks. So  O  the  past  three  weeks, we  have  been  talking  about  genetic  algorithm. Today  Uh,  we'll  probably  be  having only  half  a  class  because the  remaining  half  is  supposed  to  be  a  quiz. So  today,  my  agenda  is  very  simple. Let  me  run  through  with  you  just  to  touch  up on  what  we  covered  over  the  past  three  weeks. And  then  after  that,  I  will  use the  time  to  run through  a  couple  of  past  year  questions, you  know,  just  to  give  you  a  flavor  of the  level  of  difficulty  or  complexity,  right? Or  you  can  put  it  the  other  way,  you  know, the  level  of  simplicity of  the  questions  for  the  exam. Okay?  So  we'll  run  through  it  hopefully  with sufficient  details  so  that you  get  a  feel  for  it,  right? And  also  help  you  to build  up  some  confidence. And  of  course,  this  evening  is  your  quiz. So  it  starts  at  9:30,  right? So  perhaps  try  and  be  here at  least  10  minutes before  and  settle  down,  okay? You  only  need  a  pen,  right? You  only  need  your  pen  and  show  your  ID. That's  all  you  need. You  don't  need  calculators. Right?  No  usage  of  calculators because  there's  no  need  to  use  calculators. Okay. So  today,  I  will  just  so  called  finish  up  and then  tell  you  what  you're  responsible  for in  the  for  the  exam. So  just  like  I always  have  done  for the  past  couple  of  weeks. I'd  like  to  do  a  recap  on  our  last  lecture. In  our  last  lecture. Essentially,  what  we  have talked  about  is  just  about  representation. The  focus  of  last  lecture was  just  about  representation. And  the  different  types  of  representation, they  are  so  called  mutation  and recombination  operators  that  are appropriate  for  the  specific  type of  representation. Right?  That  was  our  focus essentially  for  last  week. Okay.  So  what  you've  seen  is  that, We  look  at  binary. Always  remember  binary  is  the  most simple  or  is  the  original  GA that  we  started  of  it. And  binary  of  course,  is  one  and  zero. Usually,  things  are  like  that  when you  first  started  it  out,  you  know, when  things  are  simple,  that  is  very  good, you  know,  because  it  allows  you  to  develop. Because  when  the  GA  first  came  about, suddenly  everybody  got  interested. It  was  just  a  binary  GA. But  even  with  binary  GA, you  saw  many  types  of  interesting  problems. So  particularly  those discrete  kind  of  problems. So  binary  was  very  effective. Because  in  the  old  days,  we  didn't  know  how to  handle  some  of  these  discrete  problems. I  mean,  we  have  techniques, we  have  deterministic  search  techniques. Deterministic  like,  for  example, your  branch  and  bound  or  any  other gradient  based  methods,  right? So  when  GA  came  about,  wow,  you  know, the  coding  so  simple, it  was  just  a  binary  coding. Now,  because  of  the  value  set,  right? So  it's  just  dealing  with  zeros  and  one. So  the  operations are  a  little  bit  more  simple. Now,  of  course,  I  think  along  the  way, you  would  also  it's natural  that  you  see  other  types  of  problems that  are  more  suitable  or  more  efficient  or convenient  to  be  represented  in  real  numbers. Many  of  the  parameters we  deal  with  are  actually real,  real  continuous  values. There's  just  a  fact,  you  know. Of  course,  we  can  take  the  approach  of  say, converting  it  or  discretize  it. But  it  turns  out  that  many  of  it are  actually  more  efficient, more  efficiently  implemented  if they  are  represented  as  real  values. Case  in  point,  the  function  optimization  pro, function  optimization  problem, the  benchmarks  are  very  complex. But  in  many  real  world  problems, you  also  deal  with so  called  approximation  or modeling  type  where  it  involves, you  know,  optimizing  a  function. Even,  for  example,  a  lot  of  those like  optimization  based  on  real  world. Let's  say,  for  example, you  have  a  physics  model, you  have  a  quantitative  model, and  those  are  a  lot  of those  parameters  or  let's  say  in your  semiconductor  processing  and  so  on. All  those  parameters  are  all  real  world. So  continuous. So  they  are  continuous, and  essentially  we  need  like  O  GA, we  need  to  have  a  way  to  vary  the  values, variation  of  the  values to  create  the  kind  of  diversity. So  we  talk  about  mutation  and  recombination. So  I  want  you  to  be  aware of  the  different  types of  so  called  mutation and  cross  over  involving  real  values. So  even  if  there are  questions  that  come  out  of  it, I  think  it  won't  be  too  complex. It's  more  of  understanding  or seeing  the  concept  of what  we  are  trying  to  do. So  I  think  so  it  goes  with  GA,  right? So  it's  more  of the  concept  or  the  ideology  that  we want  in  the  implementation when  we  apply  it  to  solve real  world  problems. Okay?  So  the  variation of  values  because  they are  real  and  continuous, it's  not  like  binary,  you  know,  binary, you  flip  it  is  just  one, there's  no  other  choice. But  real  values,  they  are infinite  number  of  choice,  right? So  as  such,  we  kind of  have  three  general  track. One  is  fixed,  meaning that  when  you  mutate  or  recombine, you  jump  into  some  kind  of a  fixed  deterministic  kind  of  value,  right? The  others  is  of  course  a  random,  right? Random.  Just  a  random  over  a  distribution. Okay?  What's  the  new  value  of  it? Well,  it's  random.  And  of  course, we  have  the  idea  of  adaptive. Adaptive  is  interesting. Along  the  way,  you  decide. What's  the  set  size  you  want  to  use? You  know?  Maybe  there's  some so  you  can  always  think,  look  at  it  this  way. When  your  algorithm  evolve towards  a  later  stage, you're  closer  to  the  solutions. So  the  distributions  of the  quality  or  the  fitness is  going  to  be  tighter. So  therefore, intuitively,  you  would  think  that the  step  size  you  need  need  to  be adjusted  smaller  because  you're closer  to  it,  right? So  this  kind  of so  called  tendency  or  so  called  logic, can  be  actually  put  into  like adaptive  kind  of  mutation  or  recombination. And  integral  representation.  All  right. So  many  way  word  problems. Very  suitable  for  integral  representation. Like  the  queens  problem, Integer, but  more  specifically  is  permutation. But  can  it  be  implemented as  integral  representation? Of  course,  you  can.  Right? So  the  same  principles  apply.  Okay. So  I  is  basically  representation  of discrete  values  from  a  finite  value  set? Like  image  processing,  R  GB, those  are  discrete  values. We  use  an  example  of  graph  coloring. You  will  notice  that  a  lot  of  times  I ask  you  to  think  about  the  representation, in  terms  of  the  fitness. Did  you  notice  that,  you  know,  right? I  I  put  quite  a  bit  of emphasis,  you  know,  right? Can  you  write  the  fitness  function? If  you  can,  then  chances  are  you already  on  the  way  to  solving  it  already. Okay? So  think  along  that  track,  you  know, It's  no  good  to  just  understand concept  like  a  level  where, you  know,  general  concept  and  all. So  to  go  really  one  step  further, think  about  representation  and think  about  the  fitness  evaluation. You  always  ask  yourself, what  is  how  do  I  represent  the  fitness? Because  fitness  is  so  important. It  connects  you  to  the  real  world  problem. The  manifestation,  the  complexity  of  the  so called  the  real  world ultimately  goes  down  to  the  fitness. That's  the  bridge,  is  it? To  the  real  world  problem. All  right.  Very  so called  important  in  that  sense. Okay.  So  individual  representation of  discrete  values  from a  finite  value  set,  permutation. All  right.  In  the  last  20  years, I  think  permutation  has become  extremely  important. Many  problems  involve  sequencing, ordering,  right? Combination.  So  combination  and many  of  it  exists  as a  permutation  from  the  values  of  a  value  set. Permutation.  Certain  kind of  arrangement,  right? Arrangements  of  the  values. Okay.  And  in  this  kind  of  problem, so  called  is  the  ordering,  right? The  ordering  of  the  genes. So  which,  of  course,  when  you convert  it  to  real  world, is  entities  or  representation of  different  things,  like, for  example,  the  cities in  your  traveling  statement  problem. So  as  such,  We also  did  quite  put quite  a  bit  of  attention,  right. So  these  are  things,  I  think, and  some  of  you  have  indeed  written to  clarify  a  few  things about  this.  You  know,  which  is  good. It  shows  that  you  are  thinking  about  it, you  are  following  right? So  maybe  after  the  class, if  you  have  any  more  questions, you  know,  we  can use  the  remaining  of  the  time, you  know,  to  clarify,  right? You  can  come  to  me  or  you  can openly  just  ask  me  anything. And  trees,  right? So  Tree  is  also  another  representation. So  the  algorithm  that  we  talked  about  is what  we  call  the  GP,  the  genetic  programming. Genetic  programming  is  about  evaluating, for  example,  evolving  programs. Evolving  procedures. So  you're  searching  for  procedure  steps on  how  to  best  solve  a  problem. Let  GA  evolve? All  right? Let  the  program  evolve the  procedural  steps,  and  so  on. So  of  course,  we  always think  about  how  do  you  represent  it. Trees  turn  out  to  be  excellent. So  I  always  kind  of  show  you, in  my  examples,  I  show  you binary  trees,  isn't  it? You  know,  binary  trees, one  parent,  two  leaves,  and  so  on. Now,  there's  a  very  nice  structure because  of  the  recursive  nature, because  every  tree,  every  subtree,  right? Any  node  is  a  so  called, you  can  break  it  up  into  any  binary  trees. But  that  doesn't  mean  that other  trees  cannot  walk  you can  also  have  trees where  the  it  is  more  than  two, right,  binary,  arity  of  two. Okay.  So  but  essentially the  so  called  in a  trees  representation,  right? So  your  cross  over  mutation, you're  kind  of  manipulating  subtrees. All  right.  That's  the  key  concept in  your  tree  representation. Okay?  So  when  you  think  about  it, it's  very  elegant,  right? So  as  long  as  you  can  represent it  in  tree,  right, maintain  that  kind  of  the  structure, right,  where  you  define  the  value  set  or the  terminal  set  and  the functions  associated  to  it. There  you  have  it, you  know,  you  can  implement a  so  called  genetic  algorithm that  manipulate  trees,  you  know, which  can  equate  to,  like, so  called  program  procedures  of even  finite  state  machines,  right? So  that  is  essentially what  we  talked  about,  right? So  fin  general  categories of  representation,  okay. And  go  through  as  and  I trust  that  a  lot  of  you  are  actually doing  it  from  the  questions  I  got. So  that's  what  we  did. And  I  also  want  to  clarify on  So  I  know I'm  going  to  get  quite  a  bit of  questions  on  this. So We  have  done  until we  have  done  until  three  representation. We  talk  about  recombination. Recombination  and  mutation. So  it's  about  manipulating  the  sub  trees. It  that's  a  whole  idea of  tree  representation. Of  course,  after  that,  you  still  have some  notes  on  issues  about  fitness, selection  and  population  management. There  are  many  other  so  called  issues,  right? In  GA,  where  we  focus  on  fitness, you  know,  how  to  rescale  the  fitness,  right? Or  how  to  manage the  population  so  called  how  to  maintain, so  called  the  diversity  and  so  on. Now,  I  was  contemplating whether  to  carry  on  to  do  it, but  I  decided,  you  know, maybe  we  are  interested, you  look  at  it  because  I  know  your  mind  will be  thinking  more  about  the  quiz,  right? So  your  preoccupation  with  the  quiz. So  having  said  that,  whatever that's  beyond  this,  right, anything  that's  beyond  this from  slide  number  60  onwards, I  won't  test  you  on  exam. So  that  will  relieve  you  off  a  little  bit. So  I  think  you  can  guess  that. I  think  The  remaining we  have  covered  quite  a  bit on  the  main  parts  about  genetic  algorithm. So  we  talk  about  representation, we  talk  about  cross  over  mutation,  right. So  although  it's  by  no  means  very, very  detailed  or  comprehensive. But  it  is  enough  for  you  to  build a  good  and  solid  genetic  algorithm. Now,  the  remaining  of  the  issues,  like, for  example,  fitness,  right? So  you  notice  the  fitness,  right? Initially,  if  it  is  random, the  spread  of  the  fitness, how  is  it  going  to  be? The  range,  it's  going  to  be  wider. Then  as  you  evolve, as  the  population  evolve, it  gets  closer  closer. Then  the  spread,  the  spread  of  it  reduce. The  diversity  in  terms  of  the based  on  the  fitness  reduces. What  happens  to  the  selection? Initially,  that  fitness. The  spread  of  the  fitness, and  then  as  you  move  along, it  converges  because  it  gets  better. Question,  right? T  from  a  perspective  of  selection, because  fitness  is  used  for  selection. What  do  you  suppose  happens? What  do  you  suppose? How  is  selection  going  to  be? So  we  say  selection is  according  to  the  fitness? Obviously,  right? Because  of  the  spread,  selection  does have  a  very  strong  effect  on  this,  correct? Because  initially  the  spread  of the  so  called  a  fitness  is  quite  wide. Then  as  you  go,  towards  the  later  part. The  fitness  values  are  not  much different  because  they are  generally  pretty  good. So  if  they  are  not  much  difference,  right? If  you  use  a  simple, so  called  fitness  proportionate  selection, it's  not  going  to  make  much  difference. Everybody  will  have  about  the  equal  chance. So  one  of  the  things  we  do  in  G  is,  like, we  rescale  it,  you  know, One  way  is  to  rescale  it. To  amplify  that  kind  of  difference. So  that's  called  fitness  scaling. Another  way  we  do  it  is  just to  use  ranking,  just  to  rank  them. You  know,  If  this  is  10.78, the  other  one  is  0.76. Okay.  I  based  on  proportion, is  not  much  different, but  if  based  on  ranking, the  one  that  is  higher,  0.78 is  going  to  be  better  than  0.76. So  these  are  all  the  issues and  a  lot  of  it,  I  think, If  you  implement  GA,  right, you  will  see  it  creeping  up. And  of  course,  the  population  management, how  to  manage  the  population? Is  there  a  way  other  models? Right?  Can  you  split it  onto  different  groups? So  we  call  this  island  model. We  can  divide  it  into  subgroup  and  then  they evolve  and  then  exchange between  the  different  groups. So  a  lot  of  interesting  concepts  and  ideas, but  we  won't  cover it  or  we  won't  talk  about  it. But  to  be  aware  of  it, if  you  are  interested if  in  your  work,  you  know, you  somehow  whatever  topics  you  work  on, you  somehow  stumble  upon  the  idea  that maybe  GA  can  be  a  good  way to  solve  your  problem. Then  you  are  aware  of  such  possibilities. So  anything  beyond  60, right,  we  won't  cover  or  you  won't  be  tested. All  right.  Whatever  in  the  quiz  is for  from  the  past  three  weeks. Okay.  So  let  me just  use  the  remaining  of  the  time and  go  back  to maybe  a  couple  of  ps  exam  questions  and is  that  Okay, I  want  to  enlarge  this,  there  you  go. Okay. This  is  back  in  2023,  right? 2023.  This  is  on ACA  year  22,  2022,  Semester  two. So  there's  a  question  here,  right? So  so  we  look at  this  particular  question.  All  right. So  I  both  of my  questions  are  original,  you  know, I  don't  try  and  dig  up  from  any  I  did Okay.  So  this  is  semester  two, right,  A  year  2022. So  if  you  look  at  the  past  exam  papers, so  the  format  is  pretty  much  like  this. There  are  usually  four  questions. So  let's  take  a  look at  question  number  one,  right? This  is  the  kind  of  question  I've  I  sat. And  as  I  said  just  now, all  these  questions  are  original  in the  sense  that  I  don't  dig  up  from  anywhere, but  of  co  the the  theoretical  basis  and  all  of  this, perhaps,  you  can  find  it  in  literature. So  let's  take  a  look  at this  interesting  scenario,  right? So  suppose  All  right? Suppose  at  birth. Every  human  being  is given  a  fixed  number  of  heartbeats. And  once  these  heartbeats are  used  up,  life  ends. This  is  a  scenario. Imagine  that  when  we  were  born, you  know,  all  of  us  have a  fixed  number  of  heartbeats.  You  know. Of  course,  over  the  number  of  years, 70  years,  80  years, the  number  of  heartbeats  will be  a  very  so  called  huge  number. Every  minute,  our  heartbeats,  70  times, 80  times  100  times, depending  on  the  state  of  our  physical  being. How  should  one  optimally  use these  heartbeats  to  have as  long  a  life  as  possible? All  right. So  you  have  a  fixed  number  of  heart  beats. So  of  course,  you  want  to  use it  optimally.  All  right. So  that  you  live  longer. This  is  quite  natural,  isn't  it? So  it  is  tempting to  suggest  that  one  is  better off  staying  in  bed  and resting  to  maintain  a  low  heart  beat. Then  if  that's  the  case,  right? You  want  I  make  sense  to  have a  low  heart  beat  to  have  a  low  heart  beat. You  just  say,  Hey,  sit  down,  relax. Don't  do  anything.  Alright? Okay. But  we  is  all  known  to  us. The  signs  of  good  health  does  point  to the  fact  that  a  train  heartbeats,  right? A  train  to  the  fact  that the  trained  heart  beats  more  slowly when  the  person  is  a  rest,  right? On  this  note,  consistent exercising  is  not  a  bad  idea.  All  right. So  although  logic,  based  on  the  fact  that, you  know,  we  have a  fixed  number  of  heart  beats, so  it's  best  that you  don't  do  anything  to  maintain  a so  called  a  low  heart  beat,  right? But  you  know,  right? Exercising  is  important,  okay? So  exercising  to  but the  problem  with  exercising  is  that you  increase  your  heart beat  tremendously.  Right? So  which  on  the  surface, you  tend  to  go  against  the  logic, based  on  the  fixed  number  of  heart  beats. Okay,  Let's  look  at  some  assumption. Suppose  that  the  untrained  heart  beats 80  times  per  minute  when  a  person  is  at  rest. And  during  exercise,  it beats  120  times  per  minute. So  let's  make  this  assumption,  right? If  you  are  the  type  that  don't  exercise  much, you  know,  and  then  you  are  accent. You  don't  do  anything,  right? Call  it  untrained  heart. So  it  beats  80  times  per  minute. And  exercise  during  exercise, 120  times  per  minute. So  if  a  person  exercises the  fraction  x  of  his  time, the  average  heart  beats  per minute  is  defined  with this  equation  f  x  equal  to 120  x  plus  one  minus  x  g  x. So  x  is  a  fraction  of  time, exercise,  the  fraction  of  the  exercise  time. So  The  average  heart beat  is  defined  by  this  equation. And  then  subsequently  to determine  the  appropriate  function  g  x. What's  this  G  x  here? GF  can  be  formulated  based  on some  logic  as  what  is  given. We  can  base  it  on  the  requirement  that  G  x should  be  close  to  80  for  small  x. Meaning  you  don't  exercise. If  you  don't  exercise,  it  should  be  80. Which  means  that  hardly  any  exercise  is  done. When  x  approaches  one, we  assume  g  to  be  closing  in  on  50. Meaning  the  person  is  well  conditioned. Let's  assume  a  simple  model  for  g  x  to be  as  such  as  given  here. So  here's  the  thing. All  right.  So  when  you  exercise  a  lot, when  you  exercise  a  lot, meaning  x  approaches  one. All  right.  So  when  x  approaches  one, either  the  minor  100 x  is  going  to  be  almost  close  to  zero. So  therefore,  your  G  X  is  about  50. So  that's  called  a  well  conditioned  hub. If  you  are  super  well  conditioned  by, may  go  down  to  50,  right? So  50  means  that  you  have  longer. Right,  because  you  are a  fixed  number  of  heart  beats. So  if  it's  lower, of  course,  you  live  longer. Okay.  So  of  course, ultimately,  what  do  you  want,  right? Also,  based  on  this  condition. So  there  are  two  situation,  right? One  when  you  exercise, you  increase  your  the  heart beat  per  minute,  right. But  on  the  other  hand,  right, when  you  don't  exercise, you  your  heart  beat  is  lower. Okay?  What's  that  street  spot that  you  want  to  attain, you  know,  such  that you  optimize  your  lifespan. So  that's  the  question.  Now,  this is  a  kind  of  question  where  I think  when  you  read the  number  of  words  and  descriptions  and  all, it  can  get  a  little bit  daunting  or  intimidating. But  actually,  to  work  out the  problem  is  not  that  difficult,  right? So  you're  asked  to  produce a  table  according  to the  format  shown  in  table one  in  your  answer  script. So  this  is  table  one. Produce  this  table  of  value  here.  All  right. Part  one,  fill  in  g  X, X,  g  X,  and  F  x  in  the  table. You  are  free  to  select 20  suitable  values  of  x  to work  out  an  approximate solution  optimum  value  for  exercising, state  the  optimum  time for  exercising  in  minutes  per  day. Is  it  clear  what  the  question  is  asking  for? It's  just  simple  calculations. So  what  you  do  is  just  pug in  some  values,  right? 20  values,  0.01,  0.02,  and  so  on. Do  you  understand?  Okay?  So  let's say  So  let's  say  you  plug  in  this  value. So  you  do  some  quick calculations  just  to  get  a  feel. Okay?  How  do  you  get  g  x from  the  equation?  Okay. So  there  are  20  values,  right? So  this  x,  you  can  choose  any  value. So  you  do  a  couple  then  before  I  showed  you. Okay.  So  the  question  says fill  in  the  values  for  x,  g  X, and  F  x  in  the  table, you're  free  to  select 20  suitable  values  of  x. So  I've  shown  you  a  set  of  values, but  in  essence,  you  can choose  any  values  that  you  want. All  right?  Just  for  the  20  values  and  so  on. And  then  based  on  the  values,  you  know, work  out  an  approximate  optimum  value, approximate  optimum  value for  exercising,  right? And  so  if  you  So  my  set  of  values, this  is  a  set  of  values  that  I  have. So  this  is  a  set  of  values. Now,  take  a  look  at  the  value,  right? What  would  be  a  good  value  for  x? What  would  be  a  good  proportion  of  x? Based  on  the  table,  right? Assuming  these  are  the  values  that  I  chose. 0.02?  Do  you  know  how  to  interpret the  value?  What's  the  objective? We  want,  you  know, fixed  number  of  heartbeats. So  to  maximize  to  increase  your  lifespan, you  want  your  heartbeat  to  be  small. So  looking  at  this  table  here, what  would  be  the  good  value for  t  based  on  these  20  values. Do  you  understand? So  the  calculation  is  very  simple. But  it's  making  sense of  all  these  numbers  here, you  know,  that  may require  a  little  bit  of  thinking. So  in  order  to  make  sense  out  of  this  number, right,  you  got  to  understand the  scenario  here,  right? What  you're  trying  to  do  is  to  so call  choose  X  such that  so  the  number  of  heartbeats  is  lower. So  if  you  look  at  all these  values  here,  right? So  0.0  if  you  take  0.01  fraction, or  1%  of  the  time  in  exercising your  resting  heart  beat  is  about  61.6. So  if  you  do  like 2%  of  the  time  in  exercising, then  it  is  55,  so  and  so  on. So  if  you  go  to  from  this  table, from  the  selected  values,  0.04  53.327,  right? That  seems  to  be  the  lowest. So  from  this  limited  set of  values  that  you  choose, you  say  that  seems  like  I just  need  to  exercise about  4%  of  the  time,  right? So  meaning  to  say  your  whole  life, right,  you  spent  about  4% of  the  time  in  exercising. Okay. Now,  we  probably  can't  relate  to  that  much. In  the  question,  it  says, how  many  minutes  per  day? How  many  0.04? So  4%  of  24  hours, 4%  of  24  hours. About  about  1  hour,  right? At  the  55  to  60  minutes. So  that's  what  according  to  the  model. So  you  spend  about  maybe, you  know,  every  day, maybe  55  minutes  or  so, you  know,  to  exercise,  right? Now,  these  are  just  this  is just  approximate  value,  right? Ideally,  if  you  know  if you're  clear  about  so called  what  optimization  means. You  can  even  go  further, and  I  think  you  can  bring it  down  to,  like,  point 0.036  or  37. So  the  idea  of putting  in  these  values  by  hand, is  just  to  get  an  idea  to know  where  the  optimum  is. And  then  after  that  through a  little  bit  of  a  fine  adjustment, you  can  actually  get  a  value  of  0.0  037. So  0.037  is  about, like  50  53,  54  minutes,  and  so  on. So  there's  a  time  that  you  should  exercise. Okay.  So  that  is  what  it  means. And  look  at  the  question  again. Ste  the  optimize  the  optimum  time for  exercising  in  minutes  per  day. So  about  55  minutes  per  day. Okay. Write  suitable  fitness  function  f x  to  scale  the  fitness  value so  that  they  are  normalized  0-1. Fill  in  the  values  under  the  column F  star  x  accordingly. You're  going  to  write  a  fitness  function  or fitness  value.  So  how  do  you  write  it? L  et's  go  to  the  table. So  this  is  a  table  of  value. What  would  be  a  suitable  fitness  function? I  think  you  would  it  is  safe to  conclude  that  the  values won't  be  zero,  right? The  heartbeats  won't  be  zero  because then  it  means  like the  person  there's  no  life,  you  know. So  there's  a  range  of  value  in particular  those  below  50,  you  know,  right? So  values  than  50  won't  won't  exist. And  also  the  higher  values, right  up  to  a  certain  range. So  it  is  kind of  give  you  an  indication  that,  you  know, your  fitness  is  only  applicable  on a  certain  range  of  values,  right. So  based  on  that  notion, so  when  you  write  the  fitness, All  right.  So  something  like  like  this, you  know,  all  these  values  me. So  when  I  mark  this,  I  don't  look for  particularly  50  or  70  as long  as  it  is  something  along that  that  line,  right? 50  -50,  if  you  put  e, that's  fine,  you  know,  right. Okay. So  suitable  function  for  normalized  fitness. So  that's  part  two  of  the  question. Then  the  next  question  is, Is  this  difficult  problem? Is  it  difficult? From  an  optimization  point  of view?  Not  difficult,  right? You  can  even  solve  by  hand, you  know,  but,  of  course, you  can  always  configure GA  to  solve  this,  you  know. It's  a  single  variable,  you  know, kind  of  a  complex  landscape, you  know,  So  it's therefore  not  a  difficult optimization  problem. Can  be  solved  in  polynomal  time. No  issue.  Okay? Okay.  The  description  may be  very  elaborate,  but  actually, the  solving  part,  working out  a  solution  is  not  difficult. So  this  is  the  first  part of  the  question.  All  right? So  let's Okay. Let's  take  a  look  at  the next  part  of  the  question. We  just  look  at  question  one. Now  we  are  done  with  P  A, Part  A  has  three  parts. So  we  answered  all  three  parts. Then  P  B  totally  separate  based  on the  categorization  of  the  type of  problems  according  to generic  input  block  architect  architecture. Which  type  of  problem  would you  categorize  the  following? Provide  explanation  for the  choice  of  your  categorization? Prediction  of  IBM  share  price based  on  historical valuation  for  trading  purpose. What  kind  of  prow? Optimization. So  which  one  would  you  categorize? So  there  can  be  more  than  one  answer. What  is  important  is  your  so  called your  justification  or  your  explanation. S.  Prediction of  share  price. So  hoses  optimization? Anybody?  Who's  as  simulation? H  It's  possible. So  you  need  to  explain  why you  see  it  as  a  so  called  simulation. Who  says  modeling? Modeling,  right?  So  you  model. So  of  course,  quite  likely  it's going  to  be  a  modeling  problem because  you  have  this  historical  data. So  you  want  to  find  a  model,  right? Such  that  you  can  approximate the  trend  based  on  historical  data. Okay.  So  I  will  kind  of like  lean  myself  more  towards  a  modeling. Right?  Well,  of  course, if  you  say  a  simulation, perhaps  you  can  explain  a  little  bit  more, you  know,  why  you  see  it as  a  simulation  problem. Okay. So  this  are  modeling? Time  series  data  with  corresponding  valuation of  share  or  past  trading are  already  known,  right? So  it's  based  on  historical  data. So  we  can  use  it  to  fit  into  a  model where  the  error  of  prediction  is  minimized. Right?  So  we're  trying  to  find  a  model  that approximate  the  valuation  based on  the  historical  trend. Now,  what  about  packing  of odd  size  boxes  into  a  truck  for  delivery? A  You  know,  you  have  a  truck,  right? You  know  what  the  truck  is, the  container  truck. So  fixed  shape,  right? So  called  rectangular,  you  know,  space. Okay.  So  you're  trying  to  fit  boxes. So  if  the  boxes  are  different  size, then  of  course,  you've  got  to  find. If  you  don't  pack  it  properly, there  will  be  a  lot  of  empty  space. So  usually,  we  call  it like  a  kind  of  bin  packing  problem, you  know,  trying  to  pack  the boxes  into  a  box. So  how  do  you  do  you  see  it  as  optimization? Modeling  simulation. I  think  this  one,  most  of  you should  be  able  to  catch  on  and  say, you  know,  very  likely  to  be  optimization  pro. So  we  are  searching  for  the input  the  input  meaning to  the  packing  order of  all  the  boxes  to  go  into  net. Okay.  What  about  the  t  one? Policy  making  for  country's economic  planning  unit. Mm  hm. So  country  needs  to do  strategic  planning,  right? On  the  economic  front. They  need  to  make  policies,  right? Maybe  to  stimulate  growth, harmony,  and  so  on. So  you  see  what  kind  of problem  do  you  see  this  as  optimization? No  lighting,  right? Modeling  simulation,  simulation. Okay.  I  think  if you  so  most  appropriate as  a  simulation  problem. So  usually  you  assume  a  model, meaning  like  a  certain  policy  and so  on  that  is  being  implemented. And  then  inputs  are  applied  to  the  model  and outputs  derived  are observed  and  evaluated,  right? So  that  is  very  likely  to  be a  so  called  a  simulation  model. Something  that  we  have  done  in  lecture, rostering  security  guards,  right? You  want  to  do  rostering. So  in  an  apartment  complex. So  many  apartment  complex, they  have  security  guards. So  they  have  a  fixed  number  of  personnel. So  you  need  to  do  rostering. What  could  be  if  you  were to  from  a  problem solving  point  of  view,  you  know. Do  you  see  this  as  optimization? Possible?  All  right? Or  like  me,  quite  common,  okay? Because  you're  trying  to you're  trying  to  find an  optimized  roster  or  schedule. But  there  are  also  a  situation  where you  may  also  pose  it  as  a  simulation,  right? So  you  want  to  simulate, maybe  you  want  to  look beyond,  you  know,  right? Let's  say  based  on  certain dynamic  conditions. During  different  time,  different  areas, the  flow  of  human  traffic is  different  at  different  time. So  usually,  you  can  see that  in  a  simulation  kind  of  problem, there  are  They  tend  to  be the  so  called  dynamic  dynamic  situation, right? Like  just  like  in  traffic  traffic  management. Right? It's  a  dynamic  situation. So  a  lot  of  this  dynamic  problem  can  fit into  the  so  called  the  simulation  kind of  scenario. So  you  got  to  explain,  right, depending  on  what  what  you  choose,  Okay. So  this  is  a  example  of one  complete  question  for  you. Let's  take  a  look  at  one  more. And  the  next  problem, I  think  you  can  relate  to  a  lot  more. Something  that  we  do  quite  a  lot. That's  and  Queens. So  I  will  look  at Semester  22024. Let  me  enlarge  this. Okay. So  question consists  of  two  independent  parts. We  just  take  a  look  at the  first  part  because  this  is  kind  of pro  we  deal  with  quite  a  bit  in  all  thee. Most  of  the  lectures  like  we  have  done. So  that  Q  equal  to  Q  and  Q  n, by  now  you  are  familiar with  this  notation  here. B  the  permutation  string  coding  for  a  GA, where  the  value  Qi denotes  the  column  position  of  the  Q, quite  similar  to  what  we  have  done. So  the  problem  as  described  here,  in  fact, is  exactly  the  one  that  we  use also  in  our  exa  Illustrative  example. So  here,  is  presented  as  a  pseudocode,  right? If  you  are  not  comfortable  with  pedo  Code, even  if  you  are  not comfortable  with  pedo  Code, I  think  it  is  not difficult  to  see  what this  code  is  trying  to  describe. So  the  zero  code  for computing  the  number  of  conflicts among  the  n  number of  queens  is  as  given  below.  All  right. So  this  procedure  here  is to  count  the  conflicts. So  initially  count  is  zero. Then  this  four  loop, and  then  they  are  nested  four  loops,  right? For  qu  the  one  to  n  minus  one, and  then  for  j  equal  to  i  plus  one  to n.  D  one  is  equal  to  Q  one  minus  q  j, absolute  value,  and  D  two  is  j  minus  one. Mm  hmm. If  d  one  equal  to  d  two, meaning  Q  i  minus  Q  j  equal  to  j  minus  one, then  we  means  that  there's  a  conflict, so  you  increment  the  count. C  represents  a  conflict. Now,  here's  a  que  not  difficult. After  the  examples  that  we've  gone g  a  few  a  couple  of  times. Write  an  equation  for the  number  of  diagonal conflict  C  Q.  All  right. Based  on  your  equation, calculate  CQ  for  this  configuration. Okay. And  what's  the  equation? So  I  heard  some  of  you  say,  Oh,  you  know, you're  not  so  comfortable  with all  the  mathematical  symbols  and  so  on. I  I  cannot  say  that  you  don't  have to  know  how  to  write  some  of  these  symbols, right,  mathematical  symbols  and  so  on. So  it  is  it is  necessary  to  have  certain  level of  confidence  in  understanding  some  of these  mathematical  symbols,  equations,  right? So  this  equation  here  is  what I've  shown  you  earlier  on  in my  paper  example. So  if  you  go  to Can  you  see  the  equation? C  Q  double  summation. The  two  nested  loops,  right? So  the  first  f  equal  to  one  to  n  minus  one. This  is  a  big  symbol. This  one. Let  me  use  a  laser  point. The  first  four  loop,  this  is  a  Sigma  symbol. And  then  the  inner  the inner  loop,  the  smaller  Sigma, j  equal  to  i  plus  one  to n.  And  here  I  use  d  here. D  equal  to  one  if  this  condition  is  true, Q  minus  one,  absolute  equal  to  j  minus  i. Otherwise,  zero. This  equation  is  quite  clear.  Very  similar. We've  seen  it  before.  All  right. Then  the  question  says to  asking  about  the  configuration  given. So  given  this  configuration  of  queen,  right? Given  this  configuration  of  queen, you  can  work  out  from  the  equation that  the  number  of  conflicts  equal  to  three. So  you  can  work  out,  for  example, like  Qin  number  one,  two, 26,  six  minus  two  is  four. Q  so  called  G  number  one  and  one, two,  three,  four,  five, G  number  one  and  G  number  five. So  one  and  five. So  there's  minus  j  or  j  minus  i. So  there's  five,  right? And  then  21,  two, three,  four,  five,  four. G  number  one  and  number  five. So  five  minus  one  is  four. Okay.  And  then  the  allele  is  two  and  six. That's  Q  minus  Q  j,  absolute. So  two  and  six,  six  minus  two  is  four. So  four  equal  to  four, that's  i  minus  j, which  is  also  equal  to  four. So  there's  a  conflict,  and  so  on. So  you  can  quickly  check  through  the  value. Now,  of  course,  if  you  want, you  can  also  draw  it  out. You  can  draw  it  out.  I  think many  of  you  would  draw  it  out,  right? And  then  you  can  see  for  yourself that  there  are  three  conflicts,  right? The  conflicts. And  so  this  is  one, this  is  two,  and  then this  is  three  conflicts. Okay. Now,  here's  a  little  bit  of  a  challenge  here. All  right?  The  next  part  is a  little  bit  of  a  challenge. Okay.  So  there's  a  high  chance you  will  give  me  a  solution  where, one  minus  c  Q  divided  by  is  it  28  28,  right? Five  times  78  times  28. So  many  of  you,  I  think, will  write  one  minus  C  Q divided  by  28,  correct? All  right?  What  if  n  equal  to  15? Because  the  question  is  the  n  Q  pro. N.  Of  course,  the  example  is  Example, is  a  eight  queen,  right. But  yet  if  you  were  to  ask  to write  a  general  form  of  the  fitness,  right? So  this  is  how  we  should  do  it,  okay? So  you  have  one  minus because  the  P  C  n  two  is actually  is  actually  n  times  n  -1/2,  right? C  N  two. Is  two  out  of  n, C  n  two  is  n  times  n  -1/2. Therefore,  your  fitness  values  will  be  such. So  there's  a  more  general  one. Many  of  you  give  answers  like  divided by  28  is  acceptable, but  that  is  not  the  so called  the  ultimate  one. And  it's  similar  to  the  end  ques  we have  talked  about,  Okay. Let's  go  to  look  at  the  remaining  part. Let  me  refresh. Okay.  Write  a  syllable  in. Okay.  So  the  second  question is  The  second  part. You  are  required  to  optimize n  dimensional  function using  a  real  value  coded GA.  For  n  equal  to  five, the  chromosome  x  is  represented  as  x  one, x  two,  x3xx  five. Function  to  optimize  is  as  follow. Assuming  this  is  a  function  optimization that  you  are  trying  to  solve. The  function  that  you're  trying  to solve  is  as  given  here. I  think  that's  big  enough. You're  trying  to  solve  this  x. This  Xia  is  a  vector x  represent  the  five  variables, x  one,  x  two  all  the  way  to  x  five. In  a  way,  you  can  look  at  it  as a  five  dimension  of  problem. But  of  course  the  function itself  is  simple  or  simplified, just  to  manage  the  complexity. Now,  of  course,  function  optimization, we're  going  to  use  the  real  value  coded perform  aromatic  crossover  operation on  the  two  chromosomes. A  equal  to  this  8.6  0.3  0.7  0.2  and B  equal  to  0.5  0.4  0.9  0.1,  and  then  one. Using  a  flexible  Alpha  approach. Flexible  Alpha  approach. Meaning  Alpha  can  varies. Here's  a  scheme  for  how  to  adapt  the  Alpha. In  the  flexible  Alpha  approach, Alpha  is  equal  to  fitness,  the  f, the  value  of  the  function  based  on A  minus  F  B, the  absolute  the  difference divided  by  F  A  pb. That's  how  you're  going  to  adjust  the  Alpha. So  you're  asked  to determine  the  value  of  F  A  B, F  A  prime,  F  B  prime, where  A  prime  and  B  prime are  the  offspring  of  the  crossover. Very  simple.  Based  on  this  rule  here, you  can  calculate  F  A, you  can  calculate  F  B. When  you  have  F  A  and  F  B, you  can  determine  the  Alpha according  to  this  equation. And  then  once  you  have  Alpha, you  can  write  out  the  offspring,  right, F  A  prime  and  then  F  B  prime, where  A  prime  and  B  prime  are the  offspring  after  the  crossover,  right? So  you  can  work  out  a  table  and  then to  calculate  these  values  here. And  after  that,  the  next  part  asks you  to  present  your  views,  right? Whether  this  is  good  or this  is  no  good.  Okay? So  you  have  two  ways  of  o,  is  this  good? Is  this  no  good? So  you  believe  it  is  good, then  you  would  provide  justification for  such  a  cross  over  method. If  you  think  it's  no  good, then  you  provide  justification for  why  is  no  good. That  is  what  the  last  part. And  I  think  the  last  part  may  present  a little  bit  a  small  challenge,  right  to  some. Okay.  So  back  to  right? So  the  flexible  Alpha  approach. All  right. So  I  did  some  calculations  on  Excel, and  this  is  what  we  get. So  F  A  is  0.98  F B  is  0.67  based  on  the  equation. All  right. 0.98.  So  this  is  F  A, based  on  this  set  of  values  given 0.8  0.6  just  minute. All  right. So  F  A  0.98  F  B  0.67. So  this  is  calculated  from  Excel  0.8 0.6  0.3  0.7  0.2,  right? So  you  get  F  x  is  0.98. And  the  other  set  of  values,  you  get  0.67. So  then  you  apply  the  flexible  Alpha,  right? So  Alpha,  once  you  know  F  A,  you  know  FP, then  you  know  the  Alpha  value, then  the  offspring  that  is  generated,  right? This  is  the  offspring  generated. So  the  offspring  that  you get  is  has  a  fitness  of  0.955, and  then  0.11  0.5. So  the  calculation  part is  as  per  the  instructions  given. So  the  question  gives  you  instructions on  how  to  calculate,  okay? So  most  people  should  get  that. O  most  people  did  get  that. Now,  you  see  that  this  approach, involves  a  flexible  alpha  approach. So  quite  Alpha  will believe  that  anything  that's flexible  tends  to  be  good,  right? Okay? Which  is  not  completely  untrue. So  it's  possible  that  it's  good,  right? So  depending  on  what  you  see  or  what  you think,  do  you  think  it's  good? Is  it  bad?  Think  about  it,  you  know? So  quite  a  creative  way to  adjust  the  Alpha  based  on  the  fitness? Is  it  good?  Not  good. So  if  you  say  no  good,  no  good. What  could  be  a  reason  that  would  lead  you  to think  that  this  is no  good  or  what  could  be  an  argument? I  think  quite  clear  is  that, assuming  you  don't  know  the  landscape. Right?  When  you  don't  know  something, the  end  of  it,  you  know,  right? You  don't  have  a  clear  understanding  of what  the  solution  landscape  is, k.  So  whatever  you  do, you  cannot  say  for  sure, you  know,  it's  going  to  affect  it in  some  positive  way  or  negative  way,  right? So  based  on  that  assumption, Alpha,  the  clear  correlation between  Alpha  and  the  landscape, that's  not  clear,  right? But  in  this  approach  here, you  would  have  some  additional  calculations that  are  required  to  determine  Alpha. The  problem  is  small, is  five  dimensions,  but  what  if it  is  a  problem  of  huge  dimension? So  if  you  argue  against  it, So  justification  on  why, this  may  not  be  a  good  approach, right  or  may  not  be  necessary, I  Computation  involved  in calculating  Alpha  value  can  be  significant. Just  added  computation. So  if  you  compare  it  to standard  standard aromatic  crossover  operation, right. The  flexible  Alpha The  additional  computational cost  increases  manifold. Because  the  conventional  one, the  Alpha  is  just  a  standard  value or  constant. So  it's  also  unlikely  that  the  cost  of the  additional  computational  resources warrants  the  improvement,  if  any. Because  we  don't  really  know. We  don't  know.  Because  we don't  know  what  the  landscape  is. Okay?  And  I  mean,  from  earlier  work, based  on  what  is  reported  in  literature, Alpha  equal  to  0.5 seems  to  work  generally  well,  right? For  very  high  dimensional  problems, this  additional  computational  cost is  even  more  serious,  okay? So  you  would  argue  against  it because  the  fact  is  that  we  don't really  know  the  landscape,  right? We  cannot  say  for  sure  whether  when  you  add all  these  calculations  based  on  fitness  here, it's  going  to  improve  the  performance. Right?  What  if  you  argue  for  it? If  you  try  to justify  for  such  an  approach,  right? So  both  answers  are  acceptable. It  all  depends  on  how  you  present  it,  Okay? Well,  same  thing  could  be  said,  you  know, we  don't  really  know  what  the  end  result we  want,  right? So  we  could  also  say  that, you  know,  since  we  don't  know,  right? So  to  have  that  Alpha that  adjust  accordingly  to  the  fitness, right,  may also  enhance  the  performance,  right? So  if  you  were  to  kind of  put  in  a  justification, So  if  you  believe  that that  alpha  value  is sensitive  enough  to  affect the  performance  of  the  algorithm. Maybe  you  have some  a  priori  knowledge  and  so  on. So  then  it  may  be  worth  the  effort. So  it's  worth  the  effort  to calculate  the  added  computation. So  Using  a  flexible  alpha  approach, each  crossover  results  in  two  offspring, fewer  crossover  to replenish  the  whole  population. So  it  is  it  is  believable  that  the  nature  and characteristics  of  some  problems may  benefit  from  such  a  solution  scheme. Okay?  So  again, there  are  two  sides  to  it,  you  know, you  can  go  argue  for  it  or you  can  argue  against  it,  right? So  I've  seen  in  the  answers,  you  know, both  spectrum  were  presented, and  they  are  marked  according to  the  views  that  are  presented. Right?  For  example,  if  you  say  you're against  it  or  you  think  it's  not good  because  nobody  use  it. That's  not  a  way  that's not  a  good  justification. Right?  Or  the  book, that  will  say  you  can  use  it,  you  know,  a. So  that's  how  I  marked  this. Okay. So  I  hope  this  examples  will  give  you an  idea  a  flavor of  the  kind  of  exam  questions,  right? And  of  course,  I  think  you  know, in  whatever  exam,  you just  do  your  best  answer,  right? Write  whatever  you  can.  You  know? If  you  don't  write  anything, no  credit  can  be  given. Okay.  So  I  think you  should  be  manageable,  right? If  you've  been  following  what  we  are  doing. So  later  on  today,  I will  see  you  in  quiz,  right? Try  and  be  punctual. If  you  are  late,  beyond  a  certain  time, I  think  probably  I won't  give  you  the  exam  the  quiz  paper. Okay.  So  930, and  you  already  know  where  you'll  be  seated. Okay.  So  I'll  see  you  this  evening. Is  that  okay?  So  we  have a  shortened  class,  right? So  you  have  any  questions  after  this. You're  welcome  to  approach  me, and  I'll  do  my  best  to  clarify. See  you  tonight.
