Good evening, everyone. We're going to start today's lecture. Last week, we started to introduce a linear programming problem. And we basically introduced a standard form. I hope you guys still remember. We also talk about, when your number of variable is not too big, for example two, you can use a graphic way to do it. Try to recall how the graphic way is carried out. In case that the variable number is too big, then we may have to consider using a simplex method. So we briefly introduced a simplex method at the end of the last week's lecture. Today we concentrate on the simplex method.

Now, try to recall the linear programming problem. It has a standardized form here. We have z equals to c transpose x, c transpose is a row vector, and subject to Ax equals b, where x is non negative, and also importantly the b, the b also need to be non negative. Actually, this one is reflected in your simplex method, one of the rules related to this one. Be aware that the Ax equals b actually is after adding the additional variables like a slack variable, when you have a less than or equal to, or the surplus variable, when you have bigger than or equal to, or the artificial variable, when you have equality.

Now, we try to recall why we need to introduce the slack variable, the surplus variable, and the artificial variables. Among those additional variables, the initial guess, the initial basic feasible solution, will rely on the slack variable and the artificial variables. And all other variable will be set value equal zero. That's how we talk about the x_0 here. x_0 is the collection of slack variable and artificial variables, which will carry non zero values. All other variable not appearing in x_0 will be assigned with value zero initially. So try to recall what x_0 really means. The collection of slack variable and the artificial variable appearing in your cost function.

Now, with this understanding of the basic setup, we're going to apply the simplex method. We're going to first start with maximization, easy for me to say. Then we come back to the minimization part.

Last week, I asked whether you guys go back and think about why we have this kind of table. Later on, when we talk about the sensitivity analysis, we may use it. I hope that you guys spend some time to think about where this table come from.

Why we need the equations, everybody knows. If I'm going to maximize z equals to c transpose x. Then you subject to the Ax equals b. All non negative. Now, take a look at these two guys. Ideally, I can move this guy to the left hand side, so I'm going to have a z minus c transpose x equal zero. Now I have another constraint, basically equality there. I got two equations. z, the variable, we don't really care. If you take a look at the table there, the first one basically corresponding to Ax equals b. Forget about the x transpose, should be x. Now, the bottom one is what? The bottom one, forget about the c_0 transpose here, this term because this one is talking about the slack variable or variable appearing in your cost function. If you don't have these things, you only focus on the first one, negative c transpose, and this one will become a zero. What does that mean? This one actually corresponding to your first equation, z minus c transpose x equals zero. This term becomes zero, corresponds to this guy. And then I simply ignore the z there now. I only write down negative c transpose, equal to negative c transpose times x equals zero, here. I basically solving equations. The simplex method is always trying to solve equations.

Now, in case that your cost function does have some slack variable or the artificial variable, because some sort of a penalty term will appear. You can actually add c_0 transpose and you put x here. The c_0 transpose will choose a slack variable or the artificial variables. But the question is, what should I put here? Should I plus or minus in terms of penalty? I want to penalize this one when you do maximization. What is the penalty you're going to put? Supposed to be plus or should be minus. You need to maximize something, but as a penalty, there has to be subtraction. You have to minus. If minus, then this term will become plus c_0 there. That's how you see c_0 transpose coming out plus that thing.

But what happened to the A and the b there? Now, tell me what is initial. When I first construct a table, that table is an initial table. That means, what is the c_0 transpose times x give you equals to what? Initially, all the slack variable will be assigned with one, or the artificial variable value will also. Take a look at the table here. Give an example. Here you got two slack variables, x3, x4, initially, they are all treated as a basic variable. Therefore, you can see the value of x3 determined by the b value here, look at the column here. The column corresponding to x3, there's only one entry, non zero is one here. x4 is another slack variable, whose value six. Now, if I want to add these two guys into my cost function, what should I do? The simple way is that I will create a vector c_0, such that they will only add up these two row here, because this two row one plus zero still one, x4 plus zero plus one still one there. Then multiply basically the c_0, they will end up with a constant. But that effect basically like you 6 plus 12 now. That's how this artificial term should be thought about. This is quite important. This is how the negative c_0 transpose b coming out.

Now think about the second term here. Think about this second term here is actually due to the introduction of the slack variable and artificial variable in your cost function. When you add these terms here at the back, essentially you change the value. Because if you don't add this guy, you have a zero here. Now, if you add this one back in, you are actually adding some value coming. But what is the value specifically? You know the slack variable value is uniquely determined by the b value. You have to choose the right entry and that right entry is specified by c_0. The c_0 will pick, among those variables, which one should be added back. Just remember that in this table, in case your cost function contains a slack variable or the artificial variable, you will introduce a c_0, which will change the initial value of your function z here. If you don't have this term, you know the z minus c transpose x is always zero initially.

Then after that, you've got the two equation here, and whatever you do the cancellation, elementary row operation, you are essentially change the value of this corresponding value here.

When the maximum is reached. Try to recall, under what conditions the maximum will be reached. What is the condition we specify? When you do maximization, you look at the coefficient. For example, if I say z equals to nine x1 plus ten x2. If you look at this guy, it is very clear this is not reaching the maximum yet because I can keep increasing x1, x2. But if two guys become negative, the coefficient will become negative. Then you know that you are not able to increase anymore. For example, if this guy is negative nine x1 minus ten x2, you know that you are not able to increase this one further now, because x1, x2 are all non negative. If you move this guy back to the other side, you have a z plus nine x1 plus ten x2 equals zero. That basically means that whenever the last row is all non negative, you stop. Because you are not able to increase the cost function value further. That's a very intuitive explanation, the stopping criteria.

If you cannot remember these things, then you just memorize the procedure. When the last row after elementary row operations, the last coefficient all become non negative, you stop. That means the cost function cannot increase further. You reach the maximum. As long as one of the guy is negative, that means one of the guy still positive, that means you are still able to increase along that variable. Keep moving forward. That's the fundamental reason behind the simplex method.

Now, once we understand the table, if I do the minimization here, for example, if I want to minimize, I will basically just do z equals negative c transpose x. Because I just put the negative one in front, to transform the maximization into minimization. Then I will construct the table. This basically minimization table. That's how the positive c transpose come into picture. Because I'm going to move this one into the left hand side, you have a z plus c transpose x equals zero. Then what happened to c_0 transpose? Because when you do minimization, how do you penalize your term? You want to do minimization. Then if I want to add the penalized term there, should I plus or should I minus the c_0 transpose times x? If you want to minimize something, but your penalty means you are intend to increase the value. That means that you have to plus something. Then you move this whole thing into the left hand side, you have a z plus c transpose x minus c_0 transpose. That's why you have the minus c_0 transpose coming into picture. That's the very intuitive explanation.

How do you construct the first table. The introducing of the c_0 transpose A and c_0 transpose b is due to the initial basic solution you choose. You will set all the slack variables value equals to the corresponding constant term in b, set all other variables value to zero. That's how the c_0 transpose A come into picture, c_0 transpose b come into picture. Then once you have these two equations there, one is cost function transformed. The other one is constraint. Ax should be equal to b. Then you are essentially just use elementary row operation, do the Gaussian elimination. You cancel the variables, and keep moving forward. That's how the simplex method, the key idea works.

Of course, there are some procedures. We try to recall how the procedure really works. We're going to just use the maximization as an illustration because for maximization, typically, all the constraint is written as a less than or equal to. You will only introduce the slack variables. The slack variables is good because the slack variables will not require you to add a penalty term in your cost function. The c_0 transpose basically just a zero vector. You don't need to worry about it at all.

Now, in this case, after you create the first table, the first step in your simplex iteration stage is that you look for the last row. Look at any variable's corresponding entry is negative or not. If you have more than one negative value in it, you choose the most negative one. Some student naturally ask, why the most negative? If I choose the least negative, is it still okay or not? Ideally, yes, it still works because as long as negative, that means that you have an intention, you have trend to keep increasing the value. It's a matter of just whether you increase the maximum or minimum, nobody knows. In these cases, they are essentially setting a rule there. Each iteration, I will follow the same rule, right hand rule or left hand rule, everybody follow the same rule. Then when I jump among the basic values, we will always go one direction. I will never come back. For example, I find one solution, next iteration, I find new one, and the third time I come back to my previous solution, this will never happen. It will keep moving forward. Keep changing until you reach the true optimal values. Choosing this one basically fix the rule. It will give you the convergence of your method. You choose the most negative one because in many cases, this one indeed sped up the computation. But not always.

Then the next step is very critical. I'm going to use the example. Last week, I gave just a very brief introduction. Now I'm going to explain why this is the case. In this initial table, you already identify the most negative entry in the last row, then the corresponding variable x1, previously must be a non basic variable, must become a basic variable next time. Then you need to decide which entry will become my next pivot. That means the value become one, and all other entry in this column will become zero. How do I decide? Then you calculate the ratio here. The first ratio is 12 over 3, give you four, 6 over 2, give you three, you choose a small one. Why I choose a small one, not a bigger one. You choose a small one because you can guarantee that when you do the elementary row operation, after elementary row operation, all this column will still maintain non negative. Because it's smallest one. When you multiply this column to the cancellation stuff, you can guarantee the outcome, the resulting new constant variable in the b column, it'll be non negative. I need to maintain the b column to be non negative. This is the reason why I choose the minimum value. This one is legitimate. The first one, choosing the most negative one, is not necessary. But this one must be. I need to maintain the b column to be all non negative. This is very important, because we're going to come back to see the sensitivity analysis, we will use this property. In the standardized LP formulation, all this constant term b column must be all non negative. I cannot have a negative value. Otherwise, you have to transform your corresponding constraint again. Multiply negative one in front, on both sides or whatever you do. So make sure that this column, they are all non negative.

Now, the rest is just to continue apply. You just apply the elementary row operation over all the entries in the column you chose previously. For that previous example, you can see that now because this guy has the smallest ratio, therefore, I will make this entry, and also the column corresponding to the most negative entry at the last row, I'm going to make this entry become my next pivot corresponding to x1. x1 will become a basic variable. What's the basic variable about? Because then after you finish the iteration, from the table, you first identify which variable is a basic variable. The basic variable is symbolized by the pivot column. That means that all the entries below this variable value zero except for one entry, which whose value is one. Then how do I read the basic variables value? I will simply locate this pivot entry. Then horizontally, I will find the corresponding constant term. That means I can immediately read the x1 will take value three. And x3 is also a basic variable because this column, there's only one entry non zero, actually value is one, other entries zero. I'm going to directly read the corresponding constant value three here, and assign the three to the x3. For the other two, they are not corresponding to the pivot column. They are called non basic variables and the value of the non basic variables are all set to zero. Then you have another feasible solution there.

At this moment, you're going to start to check. Should I stop now? Or should I continue. You look at all these entry of the last row except for the last entry, because the last entry is supposed to record the value of z, the function value. Except for the right most entry, the all other entries must be non negative. Then you know that the cost function value will not be increased further now. I already explained why this is the case. So then you stop. You finished.

Last week, I already showed that in these cases, your solution is always jumping around the vertices. Typically, this could be your feasible region. Maybe it's a high dimension, doesn't matter. Usually what we start is that this could be your initial solution, where you can see that all these original variables in your cost function, possibly will be set zero, and then the x_0 will be set value corresponding to some sort of b. This x_0 is a slack variables or the artificial variables, then this guy the value will directly taken from the b. I write the variable in informal way. That means that basically, this guy can choose non zero values. But all the original variable typically will choose zero because they are neither slack nor artificial.

You always start from somewhere. In a two dimension case, for example x1, x2. Whatever you choose, you always start from the origin, zero, zero, here. Then every iteration, you're going to move upward or downward, you're going to move to the next vertex. Now, which one you choose? Well, I cannot tell. Even you choose the most negative one doesn't mean that you must go clockwise or counter clockwise. You don't know. But once you know the next one, then you'll roughly know the direction. Then they will keep moving in the same direction. They always move like this. They will never come back. They will keep moving until you reach the optimal one. Are you sure that the optimal one must be one of the vertices? For sure, because of the LP's property, because LP is a convex problem. So the optimal value must be on the boundary. And if the solution is unique, it must be on one single vertex. That's what we already proved. That's actually very straightforward, the simplex procedure.

Now let's take a look at another example. We're going to try a few examples, before we move on to the duality theorem. In this, you can see that I'm going to still do maximization. That's good. For maximization, the constraint typically is less than or equal to here. That means I do not introduce the surplus variable. I do not introduce the artificial variable. Only the slack variable is enough. In this case, the slack variable will never be placed into your cost function as a penalty term. You don't need that. Maximization is the simplest formula we can handle.

Now, with this one, I'm going to add two slack variables. The number of slack variables determined by the number of constraints, except for the very tedious one, the non negativity of the variables. This one we don't consider at all. We consider any other constraints. The number of any other constraints will determine the number of slack variable. I got two here. That means I'm going to introduce two more slack variables, x3 and x4. Then I'm going to start to construct the table now.

You can see that the c_0 is supposed to be collection of coefficients in your cost function, corresponding to your slack variable. Because it's both a zero, so the c_0 transpose is zero. You don't need to consider this two terms. c_0 transpose times A, zero, c_0 transpose times b, zero as well. You have a very simple initial table. Then you can easily write down here now. The first row is always a record of all these variables appearing in your system. The first two are the variable initially appearing in your cost function. And the third and fourth variables are the introduced new slack variables. The last column is always the constant term b in your constraint. Now you've got two constraints. That's why you have two row here, and pay attention to the coefficient assigning because the first equation only x3 is introduced, x4 has coefficient zero. The second constraint x4 is introduced, x3 coefficient zero, fine.

The last row basically is a record of the coefficient of your cost function. Recall that previously, when we write down the maximization, I write z minus c transpose x equal zero. Therefore, you typically take a negative one. Put a negative one in front of the coefficient of the original cost function, put them in the table. That's why you have a negative one negative one because the previous cost function actually is x1 plus x2. Now I have the negative one in front, negative one here.

Now I finish the first table. In this table, I can immediately come up with the first feasible solution. Since x3 and x4 are the basic variable now, because within the column here, there's only one entry has a non zero value, which is one. Therefore, I'm going to directly set x3 value equal five. You go to the pivot entry, then you horizontally go to the right most, and that constant value is the value assignment to the x3. Similarly, x4 will take value four. Then because x1, x2 are non basic variables, because the column has a lot of non zero entry, then I will simply set x1 equal zero, x2 equal zero. I have my first solution. If you take a look at the graphic feasible region, you know that this choice will make you starting from the origin.

Then I'm going to carry out the iteration now. I have the first table, and when I check the last row, I know that I got two entry negative. That means I can still increase the cost function value when I do maximization. Then I will choose the negative, but because this both are the same, so I just randomly pick one. That's why I said, the most negative things is not really critical. I got identical choices there, you pick one. When you pick one, for example, you choose x1, x1 now is going to become your next basic variable. And the total number of basic variable is always fixed. If one more variable become a basic variable, then the previous basic variable must be converted back to the non basic one. The question is that between x3 and x4, which one should become a non basic. Then what I need to do is that I need to decide within these two entries, which one should become next pivot. If I choose this one as my pivot entry, next pivot entry, then this guy must be gone. In any cases, one variable enters, become a basic variable, then there must be one basic variable leave the set, become a non basic, to maintain the same number of basic variables during iteration.

So now, in this case, because this guy's ratio is smaller, this will become my pivot entry there. So I'm going to use elementary row operation, just do scaling. I'll make this value become one. So now I'm going to carry out elementary row operation. Now I'm going to make the other two entry become zero in the same column there. It's very straightforward, everybody should know how to do that, because it's just basic linear algebra. You have the elementary row operation, you apply it and you can see, these two entry now become zero. Of course, all other entry will be affected by this elementary row operation.

After iteration here, next, you have to read, what's my next solution. You first identify the basic variables. You look for the pivot column. That means a column contains only one non zero value. I got two here. I got x1 and x3 now become a basic variable. That means I'm going to set x1 value, identify the pivot entry, go left most along the same row, and that constant value is the value assignment to x1, x1 will become two. Then go for the second basic variable x3, and you identify the three, it's going to be the value assigned to x3. Now, x2, x4 are non basic one because they are not corresponding to the pivot column here, their value will be assigned as zero. Now you finish the second iteration. You've got the second feasible solution.

If you carefully check the x1, because now the solution is actually x1 equal to two, x2 equals zero. If you use a graphic way to check, they actually move to the neighboring vertex. Look like this one moves horizontally, because x1 now change, increase value, but the x2 still maintains zero.

Now you can say, after this second iteration, I realized that I'm still having one entry in your last row is negative. That means I still have a possibility to increase the x2 value, that will increase the cost function value. I have to continue iteration. Now, right now there's only one entry negative, so there's no other choice. x2 will be next basic variable. But if the x2 is going to enter as a basic variable, then between x1 and x3, one of the guy must go. One of them must become a non basic. Which one should go? You have to carry out the ratio check again and realize that this one will become my next pivot entry. That means my x3 will be kicked out. x3 become a non basic variable in the next iteration.

Now I can continue because this one will become one here after the scaling. Then I can carry out the elementary row operation, make these two guys become zero, then continue. After you do these two elementary row operation here, you add a multiple of one row to another row here, you make this x2 column, the two entries below the pivot entry become all zero.

Now, you got another solution here. Now you read, x1 and x2 now become a basic variable, where the x1 is going to take a value of 5 over 3. My x2 is going to take a value of 2 over 3. I have my new basic solution. x3, x4 become non basic. I'm going to simply assign zero to them. I have a final feasible solution now. But at this point, I check every entry in the last row, and they are all non negative. Then I know that there's no chance for me to keep improving the cost function any further. I will stop here. I'm going to read the right most entry in the last row as the optimal function value.

So for these simple problems, you stop here. There's no further improvement. But in many cases, you have to do it several times. Just be patient. The simplex, if you going to do manually, you have to really be patient. But you have to believe yourself. It definitely going to eventually converge to the best solutions, as long as you apply the rule correctly.

Last time I mentioned that in case you have artificial variable, then you're going to introduce a penalty term. Try to recall why we're going to introduce penalty term. Because artificial variable actually is going to deal with equality. While you have a constraint like two x1 plus x2 equals five. Assuming that your cost function is you want to maximize z equals to maybe five x1 plus two x2. The x1, x2 are your original variable, as initial solution choice, we will always choose x1, x2 to be zero. That's our choice. But if you set x1, x2 equals zero, you know this equation does not hold anymore. I have the artificial variable coming in. Let's say x3 bar. This x3 bar must enter the cost function as a penalty term. Because otherwise, you are essentially changing the solution of the original problem. You add a big M times x3 bar. By the way, you can plus or minus. You want to maximize thing, what is the penalty when you do maximization? The penalty is supposed to make things bad. What kind of make the maximization bad? Minus it. That means whenever x3 bar is not very small, it will introduce a large negative term, you are essentially bring down the cost function value. That's not intended. That's called the penalty.

This plus or minus is very important. Later on, when we talk about the Lagrange multiplier, if you have inequality constraint there, the multiplier will carry signs. Positive or negative choice of the multiplier determined by whether you maximize the cost function or minimize cost function, because the multiplier term will become like a penalty. Bear this in mind. We're going to come back to this one later, when we start to deal with nonlinear optimization, very briefly. Bear in mind, if you're going to talk about the penalty plus or minus, it's not arbitrary. You have a reason behind that.

Now, in this course, I'm not going to make things complicated because to me, if you know the basic simplex method, is good enough already. If you are really interested, you can take a look at the next few slides, but I'm not going to cover in this course. Because I find this one just adds unnecessary complication. In this course, I will not dealing with a problem that will involve artificial variables. That means you will never encounter a penalty term. Makes things easier. But I want to just test your understanding of the basic concepts. From page 29 or something, you can actually forget about it. Of course, some of you guys are dealing with optimization as a research topic, that one you better look. Anything involving the penalty term, you can skip. Will not be tested in this course.

So then next one is the duality theorem. The duality actually is a very interesting phenomenon, dealing with the LP problem, and of course, duality also appear in other problems. Here, what exactly is a duality problem? You have one LP problem, for example, maximization, and you have a systematic way to transform this one into another LP problem. Of course, you're going to ask yourself, why do I need to do that? I already busy with one LP problem. Why should I transform this one into another LP problem? Because sometimes when you do this transformation, the number of variables may be reduced. In other words, you could simplify your LP problem. But of course, when the problem is simplified, doesn't mean that your solution will change. That's the beauty of the duality. You make the problem simple, yet you don't change the optimal solution. The optimal solution is the value of your variable. You still get the same x star, for example.

Now, how should I do this transformation here? You have a minimization here, z equal to c transpose x, subject to Ax no smaller than b. That's typically minimization. My inequality typically is bigger than or equal to. Then I can write another LP problem, equal to b transpose w, subject to A transpose w less than or equal to c. If you compare these two guys, you realize, I'm going to replace c transpose by b transpose here. I'm going to replace A by A transpose. I'm going to introduce a new variable w to replace x. If you do this very mechanical transformation, you are essentially transform one type of LP into its dual problem.

Of course, after this transformation, we can rigorously prove that the two problem actually has the same best value, the cost function value. If you look at the curve there, minimization you go down, maximizing go up, eventually, they will meet. The cost function value will eventually meet. There's no duality gap. If you do other nonlinear optimization, when you do the transformation, transform maximization to minimization stuff, that's how the Lagrange multiplier method works. Then you realize that they do have a non zero duality gap there. Then another problem may not give you exactly the same solution of your original problem. But at least you know the gap, how close. If the gap is small, that means solving another problem, you are very much get closer to your true problem. But for LP, we are really good because the duality gap is simply zero. That's the perfect part of LP. That's why LP is so widely studied because you have very beautiful properties.

Now, we take a short break, then we spend more time on the dual and we see the benefit of using duality. This part could be tested. Pay attention to that. We come back at 7:30.

Okay, we come back to our lecture. In the previous session, we basically provide the details on the simplex method and expand the procedures, now we're going to start to talk about some duality issues, where it is possible to simplify our calculation a bit further.

I gave you one problem, which is called the primal problem. That's the one originally given to you. Then I have a systematic way to transform it into another problem, a different one, which is called the dual problem. Then you pay attention to the rule between these two guys, the transformation rule. You can see that if the first guy is z equals c transpose x, then the c will come to enter the constraint of the dual problem. Then if the b originally is in your primal problem, the b transpose will be in your dual problem as the coefficient vector in the cost function. You have this very systematic way of transforming that one. You can mechanize it, write a program to do this kind of transformation.

So at first sight, it doesn't really make much change. I just basically swap the c and b's position, introduce a new variable, new vector and also make the A become a transpose. That's it. So why we bother to do that?

Now, take a look at some examples. In this example, if I started with a maximization, I got four variables there. But if I transform this one into the dual problem, I will end up with three variables. Of course, the price you pay is that you're going to add one more constraint. Your constraint number will increase, but your decision variable potentially reduce. This is going to save you something in many cases. As long as the variable number is reduced, then there's a hope that your computation gets simpler. Of course, to certain extent. If you have too many constraints, it's a different story. But in any cases, they provide one means that potentially reduce the computational challenge.

Take a look at another example. This example is more obvious now. Assuming that your primal problem, you got three variables. If you're going to transform this one into its dual problem, now you realize that the number of variables will reduce 3 to 2. Then I can use a graphic way to solve it. If you've got two variables, I can use a graphic way. I don't even need to use a simplex method. But the original problem, I have no other choice. I must use a simplex method. The graphic way is much quicker to be solved.

How do you do this one? The original problem you try to minimize, z equals to ten w1 plus six w2 plus eight w3, which basically equals to (10, 6, 8) times (w1, w2, w3). You can write it like c transpose. Or I can use b transpose, make the symbol consistent, always come with b. Then your constraint would be what? Your constraint actually is written as one, two, and five, three, two, times (w1, w2, w3), and it's bigger than or equal to two and one here. I can redefine. I'm going to define this guy like A transpose. A transpose bigger than or equal to, I'm going to call this guy c. Make the notation consistent. Now I have a minimization z equal to b transpose w subject to A transpose w bigger than or equal to c. I know my dual problem equals to z, I'm going to swap the c and b now. c transpose, I'm going to replace w by a new variable x. And then you subject to, now, instead of A transpose, going to use A now, Ax, but less than or equal to b, I'm bringing this guy back into my constraint. Then I'm going to push the c and the b back into my cost function. Transform the A transpose into A. That's it.

If I write down this one correctly, then I have my c is (2, 1) here times x1 and x2. Because variable must match the dimension. This guy gave you what? Because this A transpose is two by three, so my A is three by two. So you get (1, 1), (2, 5), (3, 2). That gives you A here. The x basically is (x1, x2), and no more than b, and the b is actually this guy, that basically is ten, six, eight. Now you complete the transformation.

In the exam, if this kind of question coming out, you have to tell me what is the b, what is the c, what is the A here. Then you clearly write down how this vectors or matrix changes from the primal problem to the dual problem. And then put numbers back in. I want to see the final LP look like with numbers in there. In these problems, then clearly you see that the dual problem can reduce the computation complexity because I can use a graphic way to solve it. If you only got two variables in it, the graphic way is way faster to solve. You can just draw the picture. You can quickly identify by sliding the ruler up and down, you can quickly identify the optimal solution. The simplex is very tedious, dealing with the table.

Of course, we have to have a theoretical guarantee. If I'm going to use the duality stuff and transform the big complex problem into a simple one, what can we guarantee? The guarantee is that if an optimal solution exists, either to the primal or symmetrically the dual program, then the other program also has an optimal solution. Most importantly, the two objective functions have the same optimal value. In other words, using the simplex, once solved, the rightmost entry in a row always had the same value.

Geometrically, you can visualize the solution. If you somehow overlay feasible solution of the maximization problem and feasible solution of the minimization problem, you realize actually these two guys touch each other, exactly at the same optimal value. One is minimize, the bottom one. The other one is maximize, the top one. This is a very beautiful picture. There's no gap between the minimum value of minimization problem, maximum value of maximization problem. The duality gap is zero.

They mentioned that, for simplex method, the optimal solution will be found as the last row, the rightmost entry there. There's also something even interesting. When you do the transformation, you can still use the simplex method. That's why the table still come in. The transformation itself has nothing to do with the simplex method. You do the transformation, then you can use any other method to solve it. In case you use a simplex method, you follow exactly the procedure we mentioned in the first session. Construct the initial table and then apply the elementary row operations. Everybody should be aware of what the c_0 and c means. When you do the maximization, this c_0 is always zero. Don't need to worry about that. When your constraint is always less than or equal to, you will never encounter the c_0. As long as no artificial variable coming in, no penalty. Since in this course, we will never deal with artificial variables, therefore, you can be sure that this term will always be zero initially in your initial table.

Then, there's a very interesting phenomenon we can observe when you apply this duality transformation. It's called a complementary slackness property. What does that mean? Now, let's consider. I give you two problems. One is a primal. The other one is a dual here. The primal problem is a minimization problem. The other one is opposite. When you do the minimization, and your constraint is always written as bigger than or equal to. That basically means that you're going to introduce a surplus variable. Assuming that your surplus variable e_i, this e_i is a surplus variable there. That means that you're going to introduce those variables into this primal problem to make this constraint become equality. Of course, when this happens, you may have to choose the artificial variable. But we're not really worried too much about that one. We will only consider the surplus variables because if the algorithm converge, all these artificial variables value will become zero, will disappear. That means we don't need to bother to consider the last results. The last result we only care about is a surplus variable value.

Similarly, for the dual problem, and because it's maximization, we're going to introduce the slack variables, use s represent slack variables. For every inequality in your dual problem, you're going to introduce one s slack variable. Again, we are not considering the artificial variable. Because if you do have an equality constraint, I do need to introduce the artificial variable there. But you can guarantee that once these converge, the artificial variables, if they have a solution there, the variable value must be zero, disappear, for sure. So we don't need to worry too much.

Now with this kind of presetting. For minimization, I'm going to introduce a surplus variable due to this special form of equality. For the maximization, I'm going to introduce a slack variable. Then once the calculation is converge, we have a very beautiful results. The multiplication of the surplus variable in your primal problem, with the decision variable in your dual problem, actually equals zero. They actually match, because the number of surplus variable equal to the dimension of the b, but the number of the variable w is also matching the size of the b there. These two guys actually indeed match. Similarly, the multiplication of each slack variable in your dual problem, with the decision variable in your primal problem, is also equal zero. The proof actually is using the simplex table to argue. This is a very beautiful result.

Later on, when we talk about the KKT constraint, the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker constraint, when we're dealing with nonlinear optimization, we're going to see a similar property, the Lagrange multiplier times decision variable always equals zero, or times the constraint always equals zero. That has a similar nature. This one, of course, for LP problem, you don't really need this guy. You know this is a fact. For LP, they must hold, and you can use it to check your solution. If you do actually have a primal problem, you have solved it, and you have a dual problem, you solve it, then you can check these two properties, they will hold. Of course, nobody will do that. Because I already solve it, why bother, I solve this dual problem. That's why I'm saying that for the LP, the beautiful complementary slackness property is only have a theoretical meaning. But does not really help you to compute because you don't need to bother to do that. However, it's a very similar property in the nonlinear optimization, the KKT condition. That is critical for solving the nonlinear optimization problem. That one we will mention briefly also, maybe next week or the week after next.

Here, just bear in mind, when I say complementary slackness property, you know what I'm talking about. The slack variables in your primal problem, or the surplus variable in your primal problem, and the dual problem variable, they are related. Similarly, the slack variable of the dual problem and primal problem's variable. They are also related. This is quite interesting. For now, you can actually just memorize it.

We can consider some example here. I'm going to maximize this guy. This is a primal problem. I'm going to transform this one into its dual problem. It's a minimization here now. You can see that the 48, 20 and 80 originally appearing in a constraint in your primal problem, will enter into your cost function in your dual problem, 48, 20, 80. Similarly, previously, the coefficient vector in your primal problem will come into as part of the constraint.

After you do this transformation here, you solve two problem one by one by using simplex method. It will take some time, of course. Then the first problem, because maximization, you're going to have a slack variable. You have this solution here. You can verify it's true by using simplex method. Then you can also solve this dual problem, and then you have another solution.

Now you try to verify what this property hold. The first solution for the primal problem, you have three original variable, and you have three slack variables. s1 value is 24, s2 is zero, s3 is zero. And similarly, x1 is two, x2 is zero, and x3 is eight. Now, similarly for the dual problem, we're going to introduce a surplus variable because the dual problem is a minimization problem. You have e1, e2, e3. If you take a look at the solution here, you know that e1 equals zero, e2 equal five, e3 equals zero here. Now I'm going to check. s1 times w1, the w1 value is zero. s1 value is 24, zero times 24 give you zero. Now, s2 is zero, zero times w2, zero times ten is zero, s3 is zero, s3 times w3, zero times ten is also zero. The first one is confirmed. Then you do the other way around. You can see e1 times x1, zero times two is zero, e2 times x2, five times zero is zero, e3 times x3, zero times eight is also zero. You do actually see that the complementary slackness property holds beautifully. You see that there's a pattern there. Indeed, it's a pattern. The slack variables in one problem indeed corresponding, has a relation with your solution of another problem, the primal problem. They are indeed coupled. But we are not really worried about the deep theoretical reasoning here. The interested student can certainly dig into it.

That's the duality things. And for this one, I want to repeat that it will potentially bring benefit to you because it could reduce the number of variables.

You can think about under what conditions that they might not help you much. You know, when you use a simplex method, the complexity is not only determined by the number of variables, but also determined by the number of row. The row is determined by the number of constraint. If you have a lot of constraint, but a few number of variables. Then what method? For example, your primal problem has a lot of constraints. Only a few number of variables. Is it worthy to use dual problem? For example, you have three variables, but you have 100 constraint. In a dual problem, how many variable you have? If your primal problem has three variable, 100 constraints, your dual problem has 100 variables, how many constraint? Three constraints. Your table only has three rows. Another one has 100 rows. You can imagine which one is more convenient to compute? The three row much faster. At least writing is easier. But does that necessarily mean that it much simpler? You might still need to iterate a lot because at least you have 100 entries at the last row. You might still go through quite a few iteration. But the good news is that iteration will be much faster. You think about it. This is what comes to the complexity issues.

But at least you have some personal sense under what circumstances I should consider using the dual problem. If you find that you have very few number of constraints. For example, only two constraints. I will definitely use a dual problem. Why? Because I'm going to transform it into a dual problem that only has two variables. I will use a graphic way to solve it. A graphic way, no matter how many constraint, is not just one line. You can quickly do it. If you have no more than two constraints, you think about using the dual. Strongly recommended, it definitely will save you time.

Okay, so now we are moving to the next topic, the sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis actually is very important. In many engineering disciplines, we do need a sensitivity analysis to understand how the solutions respond to the uncertainties of your problems. Now, in the LP, you have coefficients of the cost function, that could potentially change. For example, I have one solution to solve one type of problem, to decide how many work pieces I need to produce. But then I have another problem to solve, how many shoes or apples I should grade. I realize these two problems very much similar except for a few parameters value different. Now you can ask yourself, do I really need to recompute to solve the second problem? If your sensitivity analysis tell you that the coefficient change is still within a short range, then I don't even need to bother to compute. I know that my first problem solution is the optimal one for my second one. Except for the cost function value will be different. Actually I have a systematic way to do that. I will directly adapt my first optimal solution into optimal solution for the second one. I don't need to recompute everything. That's one potential benefit of the sensitivity analysis. It tell you when you can reuse your optimal solutions from one problem in another problem.

First of all, we need to understand where the sensitivity come from. You take a look at the LP problem here. In this problem, there's several constant settings there. The A, B, C, basically, they are the coefficients coming from maybe the real applications. If due to some reason either one of them or all of them start to make certain change, the value deviated from the original intended value. Then you can ask yourself, within what range of the change, I can still safely say that those optimal variables we decide in the previous original problem is still maintained optimal. The value could be changed. But I still know that, for example, in the first problem, I know x1, x2 is my optimal variable. They become the basic variable in your last iteration. That means that their value is the optimal value there. But if I can prove that within certain change of the coefficients, the x1, x2 still maintain as the basic variables, I know that these two guys, the value will still leading to the optimal solution. But under what conditions, the last basic variable set will not change. This is what the sensitivity analysis will try to answer.

Now we have this beautiful table. For maximization. Take a look at how this one really works. Originally, you have Ax no more than b. Try to recall. The original maximization problem is z equals to c transpose x and subject to Ax no more than b. Now I'm going to start to create the slack variable coming in now. Basically, I'm going to use some identity matrix because the slack variable essentially, every slack variable initially will be considered as a basic variable. Remember that. You are in charge of identity, then you are essentially create augmented. I'm going to augment A and x, and I will use s (or I can use x) as the slack variable here. The outcome is still b here. That's how the first row come into picture. I'm going to explicitly incorporate slack variables coming in.

Take a look at this one. For example, you have two x1 plus x2 no more than five. And you have x1 plus three x2 no more than six. I know that in this cases, my A equals to (2, 1), (1, 3), and my b basically equals to five and six. Now I'm going to start to add the slack variable into the inequalities. Then I have two x1 plus x2 plus x3 equals to five, and then x1 plus three x2 plus x4 equals to six. Now, if I'm going to rewrite this one here, I know that this one basically equals to (2, 1, 1, 0), (1, 3, 0, 1). Because now your variable will become x1, x2, x3, and x4. But the outcome still five and six. You can see this is A here, and this is I coming into picture. That's how you create that table.

Now with this understanding, and the rest is all testing your understanding of the linear algebra. Once I have this equation here, and of course, I have to deal with the last row, but the last row is nothing because my cost function, I got nothing to do with my slack variable. Therefore, I will have a negative c, and zero is coefficients in your cost function corresponding to my slack variable. It's zero because there's no slack variable in my cost function. Then the outcome, y is zero here, I recall that and I explain this one earlier. Try to recall this guy here. That's how this guy come into picture. Now, because I don't have anything about the slack variable in my cost function, therefore, the augmented vector in your cost function part, this point is zero, and the last entry y is zero. Because when I move the c transpose x to the left hand side, then the zero coming out from the right hand side of your equation. That's the zero we talking about. I will transform the cost function into an equation by introducing a new variable z there, which I don't care. That's why we come into this picture. This is my initial table.

Then of course, you can actually start to do the simplex method. Do the elementary row operation on this matrix, actually on this augmented matrix. You can think about this whole block as a coefficient matrix. This column is a constant one. When you solve linear equations, I'm talking about augmented matrix. You have this coefficient matrix, constant column. Then you carry out all these elementary row operation until the simplex method stops or converge. If it converge, what happened? If you converge, then you take a look at the part corresponding to the slack variables. You realize that under the slack variable, you have another new matrix now, coming out of the elementary row operation.

For example, previously. Use the previous example. You can see that this one stops. Why stops? Because at the bottom, every guy is non negative now. Once it stops, then take a look at the coefficient matrix under the slack variables. You can see I got another three by three here now, (1, 0, 0.5), (0, 1, 0.5), (0, 0, 0.5). This is the matrix we're talking about. That's the S matrix. Whenever the simplex methods terminate, you will see this S matrix. Then you come back to your original starting matrix here. You start from here. But then you end at this matrix. Take a look at this row, what exactly happened? From your original table, this is the first row here, and then turn it into this guy.

Now, tell me what is the S matrix really is? You guys learned the linear algebra. The S matrix actually record all the elementary operations you carried out. It's a collection of the elementary operations over your identity matrix. Algebra speaking, it is a multiplication of all the elementary matrices when you do the transformation. After all this trouble, all this elementary operation effect is condensed into a single matrix S. You are essentially apply elementary row operation over A, over identity matrix I, over b. Then you transform the first simplex table into the final simplex table.

But what happened to my cost function value? This is the last row. Because when I do the elementary row operation, I will also do the same thing to my last row. My last row goes through elementary row operation. What happened to that guy? This is my original last row here. How this last row actually turned into this one? This is all about the linear algebra. If I give you a bunch of equation. When I apply the elementary row operation on the first row, that means I multiply S on every term in your first row. I end up with my final termination form. But at the same time, I'm also apply elementary row operation to the last row as well. Because I need to make the last row, every entry become non negative. This guy will also receive the elementary row operation applied to the top one and add to your last one. Try to recall. When you do the elementary operation to your last row, there's only one type of elementary row operation applied. Multiply one row, add to another row. You always do this type of operation. You multiply the rows into this first part, and you add to the last column. That's what we're doing. All this impact, all this elementary row operation, eventually will be absorbed on the last row, is actually absorbed by this y here. This y actually is a collection of all this elementary row operation applied to the last row.

Think about how this one really worked. If I ask you to refresh your memory about the linear algebra, think about what happened. The simplex method is nothing really magic. It's all on solving the linear equations. If you understand this one, everything looks so straightforward. You have the [A, I] times [x; x_s], of course, going to be b. That's the constraint. You also have the one last row, negative c transpose and zero. I put a zero corresponding to this guy, negative c correspond to this one. Zero is all the entry under the slack variables. Now you have a zero here. But later on, this one become y transpose now. What happened? How do you actually come from the I into a y transpose? If I multiply y transpose to this row here, and add to the last row, what will happen? You essentially y transpose times I, give you y transpose. Add to this guy. The outcome is this one now. Similarly, y transpose apply to A, add to this guy. You have a y transpose A. You come into the last row. Similarly, the y transpose times b, now you come into this guy. That's nothing special. It's just the same equations. But you have to think about it using elementary row operation. That's why, eventually, you come up with the final termination table.

This one suggests where you should look for the S, where you should look for the y. The rest is all fixed already, A, B, C. Now, if I start to change the value, some entries of A, some entry of the b, some g of the c, what could happen to the final table? Assuming that your S is not changed. You carried out precisely the same procedure. The same elementary operation. That means that basically S and y will not change. Then if I change the value inside A, B, C, then what does this table look like? That one will directly affect whether or not basic variables x_B will still be basic after disturbance.

This is my problem set up now. I already solve my original problem, and I got my S matrix, I got my y matrix. Now I'm going to ask you if I somehow start to change some values in the A, B, C, and I want to ask myself, under what conditions, what kind of value change will guarantee that my x_B is the same basic variables in your new problem. In other words, my optimal basic variable choice is invariant under the influence of the disturbance, robust to the disturbance. That's all about the sensitivity analysis, try to answer.

But to answer this question, the first one you need to know, when you do the simplex operations, what properties must be kept. I know that the b must be all non negative. The b vector must be all non negative. The last row of your table must be all non negative as well. Those are the necessary condition you must maintain, otherwise, simplex method will not terminate, it will continue. All these rules I introduced previously, choosing the small ratio, choosing the most negative entry in the last row, whatever, boil down to the constraint that in every step, when the simplex method terminate, the b column, the constant column must be all non negative. You cannot find any value become negative. The last row must be all non negative, except for the last entry. The last entry in the last row, I don't care, it's cost function. But all other coefficient entry must be non negative. That's the necessary condition to guarantee that the simplex method works.

I need to use these necessary conditions when I reason, if A, B, C start to have some entry changes, can I still make sure that x_B is still the basic variables in the new problem. This is the target of my sensitivity analysis. Now we have a separate condition. I can either change b only, or I'm going to change c vector, or I will change the A matrix. I'm going to analyze them one by one. Then you will see how do you derive the sufficient condition to guarantee that my x_B will still maintain the optimal basic variables, even some values in the A, B, C matrix changes. Based on this setting, there's a systematic way to tell you how do you adapt one optimal solution from one problem to another problem without going through the simplex method. You don't need to go through the simplex method anymore. Because you can guarantee that the same S, the same y will still be maintained.

We'll take a short break and then we will finish this sensitivity analysis part. Personally, I think this is the most confusing part. It does require you to understand the linear algebra. Not many actually. It's about just the solvability of the linear equations using elementary row operation, but you need to know the matrix operation. To me, I think this is the only confusing part throughout the first part of this course. The rest is very straightforward. The duality stuff, the simplex method, graph method, is very mechanical. I just follow the procedure, you're going to get results. But the sensitivity analysis, you need to know where to change, what matrix you are looking for. Then what inequality you have to set up in order to find the necessary and sufficient condition to guarantee the robustness of this problem. This is something a little bit involved.

I want to remind the first quiz will take place in week four, in the last hour of the lecture. It will be just half an hour, 30 minute quiz, very simple one. We use NTU Learn. I'm going to create a portal. It will be opened maybe 5 minutes before the quiz start. Everybody can log into the portal, and 30 minutes, if you cannot finish, it will be kicked out. That's very much a simple, smooth process. But you have to bring your own laptop. Only 30 minutes, not many questions I can ask. Don't worry too much. iPad is also fine as long as you can access NTU Learn. Everything is done inside NTU Learn. What I do is, I will post the problem in PDF file in NTU Learn. When you get into it, you see it, then you write down your answer, you take a photo, you upload back to NTU Learn. I will give you another ten to 15 minutes to upload. So you have 30 minutes to finish, and then you have another ten to 15 minutes to upload your solution. So that's roughly about 1 hour to get things done.

Okay, so now we come back to the last hour of this lecture. At the end of the previous hour, we already started to introduce the sensitivity analysis, and we need to know what's the purpose and goal of doing this one. Basically, we want to answer one question. In case that the original problem settled with x_B as the last basic variables, when the simplex method converge. Then under what conditions, even when the entry value inside the A, B, C also changed, the x_B will still be maintained as the last optimal basic variables.

Now, let's see. I'm going to start to talk about the different possibility of disturbance. Because you have the A, B, C there, ideally, one of them can change. The simplest, some b entry changes, or the c entry changes. The most complicated one is the A entry changes. That depends on the different scenario, the treatment will be different. However, the target is very clear. Because when I do this operation, I need to make sure that all the b column has to be maintained as non negative. The last row must be all non negative. And if it's possible, I need to maintain my previous basic variables, still be the basic variables. Essentially, we can say that I want my S matrix and y matrix to be the same. That's the intention there.

Now let's see. Is it possible or not? If I start to perturb some entry values in one parameter. Let's use one example. You have one model here. This is my original problem. I solve it. And is everything perfectly well? I got the optimal solution. This is basically, just your simplex method, so you create a first table. And then you know that in this table, your A, what is the A here? A is actually basically columns under your original variable x1, x2, because x3, x4, x5, they are the slack variables. So initially under the slack variable, the matrix is identity matrix. And then the collection of the two columns under the original variables is the matrix A. The c is a collection of the coefficient in cost function, and the b is the guy, 4, 12, 18. The zero, you know actually what the zero come from. I spent so much time explaining what the last entry, y is zero, initially. Now I got everything. That's my initial setting.

Now I'm going to carry out the elementary row operation, whatever. In the end, the simplex method converge into this table. Now you observe this table and you realize that the matrix under the slack variables, x3, x4, x5, corresponding to the matrix S, and also the last row, the entries in the last row corresponding to the slack variables, corresponding to the vector y transpose. I got this one as well. Based on the original problem, I have all such informations.

Now I'm going to start to perturb. But be careful now, because I'm assuming that after perturb, my elementary row operation impact will still be absorbed into the matrix S and y. These two guys still the same. Then we will see how this affect the solution.

When you solve the problem in your real application, assuming that the coefficient in your problem actually coming from the real system, for example, from the physical constraints. If the system under the influence of the unknown external factor, you don't really know the parameter actual changes. Just like in the real system, how do you analyze the robustness of the system? If some parameters start to change, which you don't really know. But then you can guarantee that within a certain range, the optimal solution is still maintained. Here we'll do the same trick. Assuming that you still apply the same S matrix and apply the same y vector. Then what kind of disturbance to the A, B, C matrix, will ensure that the final x_B, the basic variables will not change. That's what we want to answer.

Here, the first change is b. Assuming that one of the guy is perturbed. 12 now is changed to 12 plus theta. I don't know the theta value. I want to determine what the maximum theta value can ensure that my previously determined basic variable is still basic. What the previous basic variable for this one? If you take a look at this one, x1, x2. These two guys both are basic. I can read the value, of course, x2 value is six, x1 value is two. These are the optimal value in my original problem. It could slightly change later. But at least I want to make sure x1, x2 is still basic variable.

Now, let's come back to the first b. Change the 12 in the b vector into 12 plus theta. My job is to determine what kind of theta value will make my x1, x2 still basic, no change.

I'm going to bring the things into this table. This is just very mechanical now. My b change from b to b_c. In this case, you already identified S, you multiply S to the b_c. What's the b_c? Previously I mentioned, the middle 12 value become 12 plus theta. You apply this S matrix and multiply this b_c, and then you end up with this new matrix now. This one will be placed here, place to the last column of your new table. Similarly, you can also calculate the last one. But this one I don't really care because this one is basically your new optimal value. I'm not talking about this optimal value yet. I want to make sure that what kind of theta make sure that the x_B is still basic. When you finish the iteration, the x_B is still basic.

How do I ensure that in this table, x_B is still basic? You can see as long as this S is unchanged. Be careful now, because in the previous table, with this S setting there, I know that my basic variable is actually x1, x3. Now if I maintain the same S matrix here, it is obvious that I'm still have x1, x3 as my basic variable, no change at all. This is very obvious. In this problem here, as long as my S is maintained here, no change, I can guarantee this guy is still no change. But I need to make sure that this column, S times b_c, everything has to be non negative. Because otherwise, the simplex method will fail. The necessary condition for simplex method works is that this last column, every value has to be non negative. Also the last one, this part still maintain as non negative. But this one is obvious because nothing changed yet. Compare with the previous table, this last part, nothing is changed. Therefore, still everything is non negative, and perfectly fine.

The only thing that concerned me is this guy times b_c. Because now you've got the theta coming in. You have to choose the theta in such way that every entry in this block has to be non negative. As those conditions satisfied, I know that simplex method successfully terminate. In this cases, I got the three inequalities. Everybody has to be non negative. I can calculate. In the end, I know the theta must be within negative six and plus six. As long as theta within this range, I can guarantee that with the same S matrix, with the same y matrix, the simplex method will terminate. And when they terminate, the previous x_B set is still the basic variables.

Now, after this one is guaranteed, once the theta is chosen within the range, what is the true optimal value? I will directly use previously derived the y transpose, multiply the perturbed b_c. I will end up with a new optimal value. I can directly read from my previous solution, I can immediately write down the optimal solution for the new problem after perturbation.

This is the one usefulness of carried out the sensitivity analysis, because yes, you change the b, but I can tell you what is the final result look like, and also the optimal basic variable still the same. That's the answer to one type of disturbance.

Now, what happened if I'm going to make things more complex? Now, this is another model. Then I can identify the S matrix, the y vector. You carried out the simplex method. When everything is converge, now you know that x3, x4, x5 is still slack variable. Therefore, I can immediately write down my S matrix is actually this guy, (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, -1), (0, 0, 1/2). This is my S matrix, and my y vector is (0, 0, 5/2). Then from here, I know that my basic variable is x2, x3, and x4. I want to maintain it even under the disturbance or perturbation over certain problem parameters.

This is my original solution, and then I'm going to start to change the coefficients. I want to start to change coefficients of non basic variables. Well, the coefficient of non basic variable could happen either in the cost function part or in the matrix A there. There's several possibilities. We can do it one by one, makes things easier. In this problem, we know that the basic variables is x1 and x5. In the cost function, we know that the c1 corresponding to x1. c1 could be perturbed. Then in the matrix side, what could be perturbed? Actually we only consider perturbation of x1. We don't really worry about x5 because it's a slack variable. That's fine. Now we have several variable entries we can change. a_{11}, a_{21}, a_{31}, they are all in the same column, the first column, corresponding to x1.

Now, the first scenario is that I'm going to only change c1. I will keep the A matrix unchanged. But I'm going to change c here. Actually only change c1. The c2 is the same. Now the c will transform from the c to c_c, where the first value, the c1 is changed 3 to 3 plus theta. Now I'm going to bring this c_c into this table. Then I want to ask myself, once you put it in, that's the final table look like. At this point, you cannot stop because you are not really sure you should stop or not. Because theta now appearing in the last row. Try to recall my objective is to make sure the simplex method will maintain the same S matrix and the same y matrix, and also we will try to maintain the same basic variables unchanged. I want to still maintain x2, x3, and x4, as my basic variables.

Now I'm going to ask myself, what kind of theta I should choose? I know that to make this guy hold, the conditions that I need to make sure the last row has to be all non negative. Because at this moment, if this all non negative, then this table will be the final table. The simplex method will terminate at this table. Therefore, if I look at all the entries in the last row here, and this is the only suspicious part. If I can set this one to be non negative, then I'm done. I'll guarantee that if you set the theta is within this range, then this is the last simplex table. No further change. Then you also know that in the cases the optimal value is this guy, no change. This is very simple.

Now, what happened if somehow I'm going to make things more complex, I'm going to start to change the first column of A matrix because this one is corresponding to the x1, which is a non basic variable. It's getting even more complex, I'm also deal with the c1 as well. I will make the c also change. I'm going to perturb both the A matrix and the c vector. Then what will happen? I'm going to still maintain the same S matrix. In other words, I don't want to change my elementary row operations. Maintain S. Also, I'm going to maintain y as well. Don't change these two guys. Then I'm going to analyze after I perturb the A matrix and c vector, what is the final table look like? You just calculate based on this, term by term, plug them into the table. Then you have the one new table here now.

Let's calculate. We only care about the last row here. First of all, I know that the c_c transpose is what? The original c is (3, 5) here. Now I'm going to change the c1 from 3 to 3 plus theta, directly three to four now. Originally is (3, 5), but now I'm going to change to (4, 5). I'm also change my A matrix. What is my A matrix here? Take a look at the inequality there. My A matrix is: first row (1, 0), second row (0, 2), third row (3, 2). That's my A matrix. And the augmented slack variable is x3, x4, x5. That's why I don't care about them. Then from the A matrix there, and I also know the y. So I'm going to calculate y transpose times A_c here, and minus c transpose. The other one is y transpose part, I don't care because previously we know it works. There's no entry is a negative. I'm perfectly fine with this guy. Let's just analyze what this one give you.

I'm going to bring in my y. My y transpose equals to (0, 0, 5/2), under the slack variables, the last row part. Now I have this one and what is my A_c there? Because my A is this guy, and I'm going to perturb the first column here. The A_c now equals, copy the second column, no change. But what's the first one changed? The A now is changed. From (1, 0, 3) become (1, 0, 2). Now I got everything. I got y, I got the c_c there. Now I'm going to calculate, I'm going to use (0, 0, 5/2) times A_c, (1, 0, 2), (0, 2, 2), minus the c transpose here is (4, 5). Because the y is the same, the second column of the A matrix still the same and the c vector, the second entry is still the same, based on the previous calculation, the resulting entry value will not change, and definitely is non negative. That's why they don't really bother to consider. But anyway, we do it together now. This one give you five, this one also five, minus four and five, end up with (1, 0). What does that mean? Where should I put (1, 0)? If I look at this table, the (1, 0) should put into these two entries. The remaining no change. Therefore, after you put (1, 0) come in, you know the last row, everything is non negative. That means on this disturbance, nothing changed. Your original solution is still optimal, and even your optimal cost function value still maintained the same. No change. This disturbance no impact to your problem at all.

Then we can actually make things even more drastic. Now we're going to start to change the c2, and also make the second column start to change. Then I'm going to recalculate the table again, just use the same method. Identify the S, identify the y, identify the A_c, identify the c_c. Then you try to analyze the last column. Actually only focus on this part. Because my y never changed, I don't bother about the non negativity of the entries covered by y. I only care about the entries covered by this guy. Make sure that they must non negative. Now if you bring the values coming in, you realize that this is actually what you got. Bring all this computation coming in there. The last row still all non negative. What does that mean? That means the problem, even under this kind of perturbation, the second column change and so on, there's nothing changed to my problem solution. Same thing. My basic variable is still maintained as the basic variable.

Actually, in this case, previously it is x2, x3, x4, they are basic. Now actually you realize that one of the guy, x2 now become a non basic. I cannot stop here. In this table, that means I cannot stop here because I want my original basic variable x2 still maintain basic. But here, this guy is not a basic anymore. I need to make this one back to the basic variable. But how do I do that? You try to recall, in the previous position here, my pivot entry is this guy. I need to force this guy still be the pivot entry, to make sure that the solution will still be maintained. Now we will see whether this one can be done or not. Therefore, I will force this entry to be one now because it will become a pivot. I'm going to use elementary row operation to make all other entry to be zero. Then we will see whether the optimality or termination of the simplex method will change. If it's a change, then you know that this perturbation indeed caused the whole change of the problem solutions. The problem cannot take this disturbance.

You just basically apply the elementary operation, you realize that yes, indeed, everything changed. This guy, you have appearing a new negative term coming in now. That means that from this moment, the basic variable set B of the original problem cannot be maintained anymore. The problem under this disturbance, they cannot maintain optimality. The disturbance test fails, or you say the problem is not robust to this kind of a specific disturbance. That's how you do the analysis.

Try to understand how do I read this table. I want to make sure the same S matrix, the same y vector, and derive lead to the same x_B set. If either one of this guy changes, that means my original optimal solution changes. That also means that my problem is not robust to this specific disturbance. That actually is a conclusion you can make. For this example, you know that indeed the final basic variable changes, x1 will come into picture. Then you don't bother because you know this original optimality is not maintained anymore. You can continue to operate until you find a new solution, that's final. But this one is basically another simplex problem, has nothing to do with the original one.

Now you try to recall what we have done so far. When I do the sensitivity analysis, I have a clear goal. First, I need to have already solved one problem. I already identify the collection of all the elementary row operation, which is summed into the S matrix, under the slack variable. Also I have the last row, the y vector corresponding to the slack variable. I have these two things, and then I also have my x_B, the collection of all the basic variable, which is maintained at the last step. Now, I can start to perturb all these parameters in A, B, C, the three matrix. And I want to guarantee that under what conditions my problem is robust to your disturbance. In the sense that my S matrix no change, my y vector no change, my x_B set no change. I have to make sure all the b vector side has to be all non negative.

Take a look at this one one more time before we close this session. When I do all this disturbance, you can actually apply to A, B, C simultaneously. No problem. You can introduce theta_1 to the b, theta_2 to the c, theta_3 to the A matrix. Make it more general. Then once you derive into the final table, my goal is that, I want to make sure that S is no change, y is no change, and this column, S times b, says everything is non negative. I want this basic variable set is no change. And the last row has to be all non negative. If you can maintain all these properties, then you can conclude that the solution of this problem is robust to the disturbance you impose. If any disturbance is big enough to break one of the property I mentioned, then you know that the optimal solution is not robust to that specific disturbance.

If I ask you, what kind of value of the theta will force the optimal solution change? You know how to answer that. Previously, I asked you what kind of theta will not change the optimal value. The opposite condition will be the one will change the optimal solution. You got to be sensitive. If I slightly changed the way to speak, then you should know how to answer that. That one actually, I would say the trickiest one in this part. The rest part is very straightforward.

So I will stop here now. You see that this is actually something more complex coming in. You can take a look at home. If you cannot figure out why they derive in this manner, you send e-mail to me. I'm going to also go through some exercise problem next week, before we talk about the new topic. Next week, I'm going to start with 1 hour for the exercise. You have some time to practice. I don't have a specific assignment for this part. Only have one quiz. So if you understand all the things in my classroom, I think you are perfectly fine for the Quiz one. I will end up here. Thank you very much.
