Okay.  Good  evening,  everyone. So  my  name  is  So, and  if  you  guys  actually  attend  orientation, you  know  who  I  am. So  I  will  be  the  first lecture  of  this  course. And  I  mean,  you  probably already  see  the  nunment  made by  the  coordinator  Professor  Patricia  W. So  my  part  only  covered the  first  part  of  the  first  four  weeks. So  I  may  focus  on the  MNA  programming  problems, and  the  Synplex  method and  the  graphic  method. I  will  probably  mention  in the  fourth  lecture  a little  bit  about  the  lon  linear  programming. Then  the  quiz  will be  arranged  in  the  fourth  lecture, at  end  of  the  fourth  lecture. If  you  have  any  plan, you  make  sure  that  you leave  the  fourth  week  empty, then  you  can  attend  the  quiz. The  details  will  come  later. Most  likely,  you're  going  to use  the  so  called  lockdown  stuff. Everybody  will  do  online  for  the  quiz. Make  sure  that  you have  devices  to  access  the  network, you  can  either  iPad, your  laptop,  or  even  your  phone. As  long  as  it  can  access  the  network, access  the  NTU  learn,  it  should  be  fine. The  fourth  week.  All  right. Let's  start.  Today,  what  be the  introduction  of  the  linear  programming? I  know  many  of  you  guys  already  learned. If  you  find  too  simple, just  help  you  to  refresh  your  memory. We  will  may  focus  on  the  syplex  mester. Hopefully,  actually  you  will  find  useful. In  case  that  if  you  have any  question  about this  part,  send  an  e  mail  to  me. This  is  my  e  mail,  and  then  we  can  always arrange  the  offline  consultation  sessions. All  right?  Okay.  Me  just  try  to  Okay. What  is  the  near  programming? Simply  speaking, A  near  programming  model  basically involves  the  basic  optimization Ess  actually  for  otimization, consisting  of  one  near function  as  your  course  function. And  then  you  have  a  bunch  of  dia  constraints. For  example,  if  you  have  like a  tailor  has  certain  materials  available. You  have  three  type  of  materials, cotton,  silk,  and  the  wool. Each  one  has  a  certain  amount. Then  for different  combination  of  those  materials, you  can  generate  a  different  product, for  example, a  go,  so  called  what  is  that? A  suit  or  a  gun. These  are  two  products  made  out  of the  three  different  materials. Each  one  will  be  sold  with  a  different  price. Now  the  question  is  that how  many  piece  of  this  suit  or  the  gun  you should  produce  in  order  to  maximize  a  profit while  maintain  or  keep  on  under the  construing  the  total  amount  of  materials. The  people  typically  draw  a  table. In  this  table,  you  can  see, I  have  three  different  materials  and  each  row consists  of  the  construing over  the  amount  of  these  materials, for  cotton,  maximum  16  units, s,  maximum  11  units, maximum  15  units, and  then  for  different  product, then  how  much  materials are  going  to  use  for  each  type. For  suit,  you  need  two  units  of  cot. For  gun,  you  need  one  unit, but  of  course,  the  suit  need  more  materials. From  this  table,  roughly  you  know  everything. From  this  table  and you  will  see  that  actually each  row  basically consists  of  one  constituent. Then  each  column  here, basically  corresponding to  eventually  actually, corresponding  to  the so  called  these  invariables. You  have  a  suit,  you  want  to  determine how  many  suits  you're  going  to  produce, how  many  gong  you're  going  to  produce. From  this  number  of  suits  and  gong, you  can  decide  the  total  amount of  amount  of  this  profit  you're  going  to  get. The  table  tell  you  everything. Now  from  the  table,  certainly  you  can um  write  down  some  of  problem  formulation. You  need  to  specify  what  is your  optimization  goal  and what  are  the  constraints. Typically,  in  the  LP  problem  there and  normally  people  ask to  determine  the  quantity  to  be  optimized. Also  to  make  sure  that all  these  stipulated  constraints or  restrictions  will  be  satisfied. That's  basically  just  two  things. It's  very  straightforward.  Okay. For  example,  in the  previous  Taylor's  example,  you  know, so  You  try  to write  down  the  constrain  one  by  one,  now, assuming  that  the  x  represent  the  number  of suits  and  the  y represent  the  number  of  gongs. Then  the  first  one  basically represent  the  amount  of  silk  is  going  to  use. Then  the  second  represent the  amount  of  who  is  going  to  use. Of  course,  you  have  some other  constrain  as  well. You  can  take  a  look  at  the  example, take  a  look  at  the  This  table  here. You  can  see  from this  table  You  see  that  well, I  need  to  make  sure  that the  carton  total  has  been  normal  than  16, the  silk  has  to  be  normal  than  11, and  the  wo  has  been  no  more  than  15. I  write  on  three  stings. My  cost  function  is  30  times  the total  pal  so  x  30  x, and  plus  50  times  the  total  pal  gum, the  50,  that's  the  cost  function. You  want  to  maximize  it. I  want  to  maximize  the  profit. That's  give  you  this  one  here,  right? So  it's  very  straightforward. Transforming  a  practical  problem  into a  simple  LP  formulation  is the  one  skills  you  have  to  understand. Because  it  definitely  appear in  your  first  quiz,  right? Um  Second  one,  another  example  there. In  case  that  a  person require  a  certain  units  of  the  chemicals. You  have  a  three  chemicals  like  ABC  there, to  produce  a  different  product you  got  two  products. Then  you  know  that  for  chemical  A, you  have  total  the  maximum  amount of  chemical  A  is  a  ten  units. The  maximum  unit  number  of  units  of  b  is  12, and  the  maximum  number  of  units  of  C  is  12. Those  are  the  constraint  now, got  a  three  row  here,  three  constrain. Then  those  columns  corresponding to  the  amount  of chemicals  to  be  used  for  each  product. Also  the  last  one  represent the  price  or  the  cost  actually. Because  now  we're  talking about  the  cost  here. Eventually  you're  going  to  minimize  the  cost. If  it's  actually  the  price  that  means you're  going  to  maximize  profit. With  this  table,  you  know actually  if  you  want  to  minimize  the  cost, Certainly,  of  course,  you  minimize  the  cost, you  have  to  maximize  something,  right? Because  otherwise, if  you  don't  produce  anything, then  just  a  zero  cost. Do  you  have  some  other  objectives  to  make you  try  to  use  as  many  materials  as  possible. This  is  another  way  to  form  the  problem. You  can  certainly  form the  problem  into  this  formulation  there. You  can  decide  whether  you should  minimize  or  should maximize  depending  on  your  objective,  right. That's  actually  another  example. Then  you  have  zillions  of  this  kind of  a  program  problem  in  your  daily  life. Actually  you  frequently  encounter  them, you  buy  a  the  movie  tickets, or  you  buy  gifts  to  your  friends, with  a  limited  budget. They're  all  actually  basically  LP  problems. Now,  with  all  these  type  of  LP  problems, are  we  able  to  have generic  solution  strategies? The  answer  is  yes,  we  do  actually  have very  generic  or  solution  procedure. This  course  focus  on  this kind  of  procedure  there  now. But  to  have  this  generic  procedure, I  need  to  have  a  standardized  form. I  need  to  standardize the  mediate  programming  formulation. Here  is  a  one  standardization  here  now. The  LP  problems  are  concerned with  finding  the  maximum  or minimum  of  a  near  function  there. Basically  the  linear  function. Subject  to  the  construing. Everybody  familiar  with that  law,  the  liar  equation. Cose  people  ask  why  is aa  equation,  not  inequality. Because  typically  we  see  that's less  than  equal  to  something. Why  everything  now  goes  to  become  equality? Because  later  on,  we  know that  by  adding  the  snack  variable, surplus  variable,  and  so  on  and  so  forth, you  can  transform  near inequality  into  equality  there. Therefore,  eventually  boil  down to  the  LP  problem. This  can  be  considered as  one  standardized  for. Of  course,  when  you  write on  the  combination  at  the  beginning, certainly  you  can  involve  inequality. But  then  when  you  try  to  solve  it, by  introducing  actual  variables, you  will  transform  every inequality  into  equality. Okay?  There's  a  quite  a  different  way to  make  this  transformation. So  as  some  terminology,  before  we  introduce, the  concept  of  different  type  of  variables, you're  going  to  introduce,  the  one  you transform  inequality  into  equality. First  of  all,  I  mean,  you  when  you give  L  P  problem  there. The  solution  would  be the  basic  value  assignment  to  every  variable. Assume  that  in  this  LP  problem, you've  got  n  variables. Every  assignment  to  the  variables, every  value  assignment  to the  variables  give  you  one  solution. If  the  solution  satisfy  all  the  contra, it  is  called  a  feasible  solution, and  a  collection  of all  the  feasible  solutions is  a  feasible  region. For  any  other  value assignment  to  the  variable, which  violate  at  least  one  construing, then  that  basically  the  vector  of values  or  the  value  of assignments  is  called  in  fasi  solution. Now,  in  the  exam, if  I  talk  about the  pas  solution  in  phasic  solution, you  shouldn't  know  what  I'm  talking  about. All  right. Well,  this  is  just  refresh  your  memory, I  think  that  everybody  should  not  this, non  feasible  solutions  while  solving equations,  or  solving  equations. This  is  actually  the  one  picture  that basically  allow  you  to directly  plod  the  physical  region. Hypothetically,  assume  that  you  have this  L  P  problem and  you  try  to  maximize  a  cost  function, three  x  one  plus  five  x  two, and  you  have  a  bunch  of  these  constraints. Here,  make  sure  that  all  the  variables will  take  the  non  negative  values, be  careful  now  in the  LP  problems  in  the  standardized  form, all  the  variable  should take  non  negative  values. In  case  you  have  more  flexibility, you  have  to  do  some  transformation. Here,  if  I  give  you  the  LP, I  want  to  decide  what  kind  of region  or  the  set of  points  will  become  a  feasible. For  every  constraint. Basically  the  corresponding  two, because  it  the  near  constraint, the  actually  corresponding  to one  region  of  space. Because  I  got  two  variables  there, so  dally  who  I  have  two  dimensional  space. The  first  one  basically divide  the  space  into  two  part. I  think  it's  x  one  equal  to  four, for  example,  this  guy, this  vertical  line  here. They  divide  the  whole  space  into  two  part, left  hand  side,  right  hand  side. B  you  are  chasing  X  one  lo  more  than  four, so  the  left  hand  side actually  is  a  pasile  part. Of  course,  you  know  that  x1x2 has  all  non  negative. That  means  that  you  are  essentially considering  point  in  the  first  part. Then  the  second  constrain  tell  you  that x  two  should  be  no  more  than  six. Here  you  go,  x  two,  no  more  than  six, you  o  the  x  to  equal  to  six, and  then  they  divide the  whole  space  into  two  parts. You  know  that  any  point below  this  line  corresponding  to  x  two, no  more  than  six,  you  ue so  this  one  here. Then  you  have  the  third  one. The  three  x  one  plus  two  x  two  equals  to  18, you  ow  this  line  here. And  then  you  up  to  pick  one  point because  divide the  whole  space  into  two  parts. One  part  will  be  feasible, the  other  part  is  not. You  just  to  to  pick  one  point  in  one  side, you  check  with this  construent  satisfy  or  not. If  yes,  then  this  side is  feasible  for  this  construent, otherwise  the  other  side, very  quick  to  check. Now  because  you  need all  the  constitruent  to  be satisfied  simultaneously. Therefore,  this  region  is  intersection, is  intersection  of  the  three. Actually  is  five  because  x1x2 also  has  a  const  non  negative is  also  construct  a  five  constrain. Five  region  intersect  with  charter, and  that's  the  final outcome  of  the  intersection, then  this  region represent  the  feasible  region. Means  that  all  the  points  inside  this  region will  satisfy  all  these  five  consts. The  LP  problem  is  very  easy  to  plot. Of  course,  I  say  I  give  you three  or  four  or  five  variables, are  you  going  to  slot  in  the  hyperspace, then  we  cannot  visilize  it. Certainly,  this  is  not  a  good  way  to  do  it. But  for  a  small  number  of  variables, yeah,  you  can  visilize  it. But  at  least  you  know  that theoretically  it  is  possible  to identify  the  feasible  region  in the  LP  pro  dealing  with  all  the  near  consts. Now,  this  example  shows  in  feasible  region. You  can  see  previously,  I  still  have the  same  constrain  here, one,  two,  three,  the  first  three  constrains. But  now  I'm  going  to add  in  one  more  constrain. Three  x  one  plus  five  x  two, no  smaller  than  50. This  is  a  line  representing  three x  one  plus  five  x  two  equals  50. Now  you  actually  choose one  point,  for  example, above  this  one,  you  can  see  that this  one  indeed  satisfying  this  inequality. That  means  that  all  the  point  above this  line  actually  is feasible  for  this  constraint. However,  when  you  take the  intersection  of all  the  previous  five  region together  with  a  new  region, you  know  that  the  outcome  is  empty. That  means  there's  no  point  in this  x  y  space  that  can satisfy  all  these  six  constraints. Then  you  know  the  problem  has  no  solution. Has  no  feasible  solution. You  can  plot  it  actually, later  on  in  a  moment,  I'm  going  to  talk  about the  graphic  way  of  solving  the  LP  problem. Basically  just  rely  on  this  rain  them. What  you  need  to  know  just  the one  ruler  of  one  pen, you  can  solve  this  low dimensional  LP  problem. Right.  Fossil  good. Then  we  come  back  to the  first  question  because we  know  that  we  introduced, the  standardized  form  of  LP  problem  involve one  cost  function  and  a  bunch  of  equalities. But  in  case  that  you  have  a  un  equalities, how  am  I  supposed  to  transform this  one  into  equality? Why  we  need  to  do  this  transformation? This  is  actually  the  question  in our  mind,  we  need  to  answer. Now,  the  first  type  of  transformation, is  called  introducing  something called  a  snack  variables. If  I  give  you  a  constraint  like  this  one, the  left  hand  side  is  a  polynomial, no  polynomial,  ac linear  function  over  your  variable, less  than  n  equal  to BI  Bf  this  is  critical,  less  than  equal  to. The  BI  has  to  be  nonnegative. This  is  another  requirement for  the  standardized  LP  formulation. In  the  LP  formulation, the  right  hand  side  of each  constru  has  to  be  nonnegative. Now,  if  I  have  this  equality  construing  here, I  want  to  transform  this  one in  two  I  equality. What  I  can  do  is  that  I'm  going  to add  one  actual  variable. I  call  it  x  n  plus i  because  this  is  actually  constrain. N  plus  I  here  because  I  got  n  here, plus  I  should  be  actually  I  think  this is  probably  not  too  good  notation. Maybe  just  x  plus  one,  easier  to  read. But  this  one  basically  represent all  the  values  represent the  gap  between  the  B  i  and  the  lef  N  side. Because  once  this  construing  is  satisfied, left  hand  side  should  not  be more  than  the  right  hand  side. Therefore,  Bi  minus  left and  side  is  strictly  long  negative. That  means  that  this  newly introduced  variable  also  non  negative. Is  perfectly  satisfying  the  LP  requirements. Now  I  transform  the  one  into an  equality  construing  where  I introduce  one  actual  variable whose  value  should  be  non  negative. We  give  a  name  called  a  snack  variable. For  example,  if  I  have  this  constrain  three  x one  plus  five  x two  plus  two  x  three  plus  four  x  four, no  more  than  100. Now  I'm  going  to  add one  more  variable  x  five, and  x  five  has  to  be  non  negative, and  then  transform  this  12  into  equality. Here  the  x  five  is  called  the  snack  variable. That's  one  type  of  type  of  transformation. Now,  in  case  that  you  have  a  free  variables. I  mean,  I  could  actually  have  some  variables. I  don't  restrict  it  to  non  negative. In  these  cases,  I  can  always introduce  two  new  variables, x  to  prime,  x  to  double  prime. Both  of  them  are  non  negative, such  that  x  two  can  be  represented  as a  subtraction  or  the  difference of  the  two  variables. Then  if  the  x  two  double  prime is  bigger  than  x  two  prime, the  x  to  take  the  negative  value or  the  other  way  around. Now  I  can  introduce  more  variables  to  make to  enforce  all  these  vars appearing  in  P  to  be  non  negative. Later  on,  we  are  going  to  see especially  in  the  simplex  method. Why  we  need  to  force the  x  to  be  all  non  negative? Bear  this  in  mind.  You're  going to  have  this  question  in  mind, why  we  need  to  go  through  this  one, second. I  think  that  Yeah. Somehow  it's  actually  jumping  too  fast, I  don't  know  whether  it,  sorry, somehow  I  thought  it's a  flip  over  page  by  page. Actually  that  one  page  contains several  sub  pages. That's  actually  jumping  too  fast. Now  the  second  one,  the  second  type of  transformation  here. If  I  have  the  inequality in  terms  of  the  type. You  can  say  type  two.  You  have the  near  function  should be  actually  no  smaller, sorry,  bigger  and  equal  to  B, not  just  a  big  hole. If  the  N  side  is  no  smaller  than the  B  where  the  BR is  strictly  non  negative  hole, then  I  I  minus another  new,  non  negative  variable. Because  you  know  once this  constrain  satisfied, your  left  hand  side  is  strictly smaller,  then  the  right  hand  side. Therefore,  the  left  hand  side  and  modus right  hand  side  is  strictly  non  negative. I  can  introduce  this  non  variable  coming. Now  if  I  introduce  writing  in  this  manner, the  extraction  tool  now  become  equality. This  one  has  to  be  bigger  than  or  equal  to. You  have  to  put  things  here. For  example,  if  I  have  this  constrain  here, three  x  one  plus  five  x  two  plus  x  three, is  no  smaller  than  a  40. Now  I'm  going  to  minus  X  four. I'm  going  to  introduce a  new  variable  x  four  now, I  minus  x  four  to  bring this  one  into  equality  there. Now,  I  handle  the  the  second  type, and  then  it's  a  free  variable. I  just  introduced  previously. I  cannot  just  use  this  one  to  flip  pages. This  is  an  example  of  how  do  we  transform an  arbitrary  LP  formulation into  a  standardized  form. Now,  when  you  take  a  look  at this  LP  formulation, I  realize  that  um  I  have  one  equality, and  I  have  a  two  inequality. Now,  the  second  in  equality  is  ok because  this  constant  is  a non  negative,  it's  perfectly  fine. By  the  type  one,  I'm  going  to introduce  a  snack  variable. I  will  call  for  example, eight,  for  example,  x3xf. You  can  say,  x  four,  eight  here. I  have  a  three  x  one  minus  five  x two  plus  three  x  three  plus x  four  is  equal  to  five. Now  when  I  deal  with  the  third  one, I  realize  the  constant  term  is  negative. That's  not  in  the  standard  of  form. I  can  first  get rid  of  this  negative  sign  in  front, so  I  can  multiply  negative  one  on  both  sides. I'm  going  to  transfer  the  last  stru into  this  form. If  the  form,  I  know  the  left  hand  side is  no  ster  than  four, that  means  I'm  going  to introduce  a  surplus  variable. Let's  use  x  five. That  means  four  x  one  plus  nine  x  two  minus four  x  three  minus  x  five  equals  to  four. Now  I  transform  everything  into  equality. But  it  is  actually  completed? Actually,  it  turns  out  that  not  really. Because  when  I  have  this  equality  here, if  I  want  to  find a  initial  value  to  this  one. I'm  still  facing  trouble when  I  deal  with  this  kind  of  equality here  and  this  type  three  inequality. Because  I  cannot  just  to  let x  1x2x  become  zero, then  make  all  constraint  satisfied. I  need  to  introduce  one  more  constraint. This  one  is  called  artificial  variable. I  think  that's  somewhere.  Maybe  I just  flip  over  it  now. Let  me  just  try  to  find  a  second.  Wait. Um,  I  still  like  the  PPT  low. I  mean,  this  is  not  the  PPD  got  me  a bit  troublesome  to  find. Okay.  So  once  you have  this  transformation  here, I  think  this  one  is  s.  Okay. Um  Let  me  try  to  see.  Yeah. Previously,  by  adding the  four  and  five  snack variable  and  surplus  variables  there, I  turn  everything  into  equality. But  it's  not  mm easy  for  us  to  find  ital  solution. We  need  to  do  another  transformation. Basically,  we  want  to  actually generate  initial  feasible  solution. Before  we  talk  about  do the  one  last  transformation, introduce  another  type  of  variables. We  know  that  once  you  have a  transformation  of standardized  and  LP  problem, the  first  thing  you  need  to  do  is  you have  to  get  a  initial  pasial  solution. Then  you  can  carry out  tiz  computation  procedure. Continue  to  find  the  new feasible  solution  tiled  converge. That's  what  we  expect  to  have. But  still,  we  realize that  even  with  all  the  equity  construes, it's  still  not  too  obvious to  immediately  find  a  physical  solution. Take  a  look  at  one  example  here. We  have  three  type  of  construals, less  than  equal  to,  bigger than  equal  two  and  equality  there. For  the  first  one,  we know  that  we're  going  to  introduce a  snack  variable.  X  three  here. The  second  one  we  need  to introduce  so  called  Surplus  variable. The  last  one,  keep  the, but  the  simplest  one  for  us  to  find initial  solution  is  that  I  will  try to  set  some  var  become  zero, and  then  automatically the  inequality  will  hold. But  if  I  only  introduce  x  three  and  x  four, and  by  setting  x1x2  equals  zero, I'm  not  able  to  get  the  equality  hold. In  these  cases,  what  I  can  do is  that  I  will  do  one  more  step. For  the  second  type, the  bigger  than  equal  to, and  equality,  I  will  introduce one  last  type  of  variables, it's  called  artificial  variables. X  y  bar,  x  is  bar  here. Now,  take  a  look  at  this  one. I  know  all  the  variable has  been  non  negative. If  I  said  x  one, x  to  become  zero, I  could  even  said  x  f  equal  zero, I  will  immediately  has x  three  equal  to  three, x  five  bar  to  six,  X  six  bar  215. In  other  words,  I'm  immediately  fine. The  simplest  choice  of  the  ital  values, satisfying  all  the  cons. So  far  so  good. I  introduce  so  many  variables, they  just  want  to  make  sure  that  I  can quickly  find  ital  conditions. If  I  don't  have  these  artificial  variables, everything  seems  fine. Because  the  snack  variable  and the  surplus  variable  will not  introduce  any  new  solution. Because  basically, it  just  include  all  the  possible  solutions satisfying  the  regional  inequality. However,  the  introduction  of the  artificial  variable  does actually  change  your  solution  space. Because  now  you  have a  new  actual  variables  that  could  take  value, which  basically  squeeze  the  solution  space  of the  previous  the  original  variables  there. For  example,  if  your  set x  1x2x4  becomes  zero, your  x  five  bar  become  six. Then  you  know  that  when  it  goes back  to  your  original  constraint, this  one  does  not  hold  anymore because  your  x  y  equals  zero, x  equals  zero,  but  cannot  be  bigger  than  six. In  other  words,  by  introducing  x  y  bar, this  so  called  artifice  variable, the  solution  satisfying  the  new  constraints actually  will  violate the  original  constraint. This  is  actually  the  problem we're  going  to  deal  with. Ideally,  when  you  do  the  iteration, you  have  to  make  sure  that when  the  er  equation  terminate, all  these  artificial  variables  value should  go  to  zero. Then  you'll  know  that  you  actually converge  to  the  actual physical  solution  state. Introducing  artificial  variable  is  dangerous. It's  easy  for  you  to  find the  ital  solution  to  start  with. But  that  tal  solution  may  not be  the  paso  solution of  your  original  problem. During  the  elevation,  you  have  to  somehow to  force  the  artificial variables  value  goes  to  zero. What  we  know  how  to  do  that. You're  going  to  add  penalty  term to  your  cost  function.  Okay? That's  actually  how  we  do  it  law. Now,  after  introduce  all  the  three  type of  the  variables  there. Then  we  will  try  to  see  how  do  you  solve  it. Because  we  are  now  using artificial  variables  there  and  we  know  that artificial  variable  has  a  risk of  introducing  new  solutions  there. We  need  to  deal  with  this  one  carefully. But  think  about  one  do  you need  to  introduce  artificial  variables? Whenever  you're  construing  it only  involve  less  than  and  equal  to, and  your  right  hand  side  comes  non  negative. Now  you  know  that  you  only need  a  snack  variable. There's  no  need  for  any  artificial  variables. You  are  perfectly  fine. Only  when  you  have  equality  construing, or  you  have  a  bigger than  or  equal  to  construing, that  means  that  you're introducing  suplus  variable, then  you  have  to  introduce  the  tip  variable. This  is  actually  the  two these  kind  of  scenarios, that  will  trigger  you  to introduce  official  variables. But  once  the  artificial variable  is  introduced, we  know  that  I  need  to  force the  artificial  variables  to  be as  small  as  possible,  ID  to  be  zero. Later  on,  we  need  to actually  use  the  penalty  term just  like  in  your  um Typical  quart  optimization, for  example,  you  add the  actual  term  at the  end  of  the  cost  function. M  is  very  big,  fix  m times  x  squared,  whatever. You  that  only  one  that  x  becomes  zero, then  the  cose  function  will  be  minimized. That's  actually  what  we're  doing. We're  going  to  actually talk  about  this  one  shortly, but  once  you  introduce this  variable  and  transform this  one  into  equality, and  as  long  as  you  don't  have any  artifice  variable,  then  fantastic. I  can  easily  set,  for  example, x  y  equal  to  zero,  x  equal  to  zero, then  the  rest  just  x  equal  to  four, x  412,  x  518, equal  one  feasible  solution. Because  this  one  there's no  artificial  variables. This  initial  solution  itself  is  also feasible  to  your  original  problem. It  is  fantastic. So  that's  how  you  guess. This  is  just  one  guess.  It's  a  quick  one. Now,  in  case  that  I  do  need  to  introduce artificial  variable  se  because  I  have these  things  very  bad  case. I  have  a  constraint  is  bigger  than  equal  to, I  suggest  that  I  need to  introduce  suplus  variable, which  also  involve  adding another  artificial  variable  se. This  one  is  equality, also  means  that  I  need  to  introduce artificial  variable  d.  That's  really  bad. With  this  introduction, Now  we  can  see  what's  going  on  there. This  is  basically,  A  three  and A  five  are  the  new  artificial  variable  now. Now  with  this  new  constraints  here, I  can  set  x1x2. And  e  four  to  be  zero, because  of  an  alco  the  e  four is  actually  surprise  variable. I  can  set  it  equal  to  zero. Then  I  can  immediately read  A  three  equals  to  14, A  five  equal  to  12  and  S  six  equals  to  19. I  have  a  very  quick  way of  deriving  itial  value. Satisfy  all  these  transformed. Of  course,  you  have  to  go  back. You  realize  that  if  I  go  back, some  variable  actually  does  not  hold  anymore. This  guy  does  not  hold  anymore. Actually,  the  first  one  also  does  not  hold  if you  set  x1x  equals  zero  equal  to  zero. This  both  are  violated. But  that  does  not  stop us  starting  with  something  that eventually  will  force  the  solution  approach to  the  truly  physical  one. To  force  the  Artificial  variable  value goes  back  to  zero. I  mean  with  basic  just  eight  penalty  term. In  your  course  function.  Now  you  can  see. I'm  going  to  after introducing  those  x  bar  things. Whenever  they  have  a  bar  actually means  it's  artificial  variable. Because  these  two  guys are  artificial  variables, therefore,  I'm  going  to  add them  into  my  course  function. I'm  going  to  multiply  a very  large  penalty  term  there. Increase  minimization. If  you  want  to  minimize  this  one, I'm  going  to  plus. If  I  ask  you  to  maximize  something, what  I'm  going  to  do?  I'm  just  a  minus. I'm  going  to  minus  times  x. The  bottom  line  is that  you  need  to  make  sure  that whenever  the  artie  variable values  not  goes  to  zero, a  will  create  a  huge  value  deviation from  the  true  optimal  solution  state. After  aiding  these  terms  there, the  problem  is  still  LP,  still  LP. But  this  LP  is  much  easier  to  solve. In  principle,  you  should  always find  the  truly  optimal  solution. In  other  words,  when  the  system  converge, it  will  converge  to the  truly  optimal  solution  step. Of  course,  aiding these  actual  terms  will  make the  syplex  method  actually  complex. In  this  course,  I  can  tell  you, typically  we  will  not treating  artificial  variable in  a  simplex  method. I  can  tell  you  no.  However,  you do  need  to  know  the  concept. In  other  words,  when  later  on  in  the  future, you're  dealing  with  a  problem involving  bigger  than  equal  to, you  know  you  have  no  other  choice  but  to introduce  art  variable  and then  the  penalty  comes  out. The  standard  symplex  method will  not  work  anymore. You  need  to  do  v  version,  the  symplex  method. Which  we  were  not  going  to  touch. In  this  course.  Yeah,  we're just  trying  to  make  it  easy. You  just  know  something  some  basic  concepts, if  you're  really  interested, you  can  read  into  these  slides. Slide  spend  a  few  slides. This  slide,  spend  a  few  pages  talking about  the  most  general  case, but  it  will  not  covered or  not  mandatory  for  everyone. Yeah.  All  right. Finally,  after  all  these  a  way of  introducing  variables  here, And  we  rewrite  everything into  a  matrix  repentation. Your  cost  function  equals  to z  equals  to  c  transpose  times  x. C  basic  is  a  vector. C  transpo  is  a  row  vector, x  is  a  con  vector, and  then  subject  to  the  A  x  equals  B  after introducing  the  snack  variable, su  plus  variable  and  artificial  variables. Now  you  have  everything into  a  un  equal  to  equ  ano. Then  of  course,  all  these  variables has  to  be  non  native. Okay.  And  once  you  write  in  this  manner, you  finally  have  the  standard  die  the  form. All  right.  Okay. In  a  quiz,  if  I  ask  you  to  transform a  given  L  P  problem  into  a  standardized  form, then  you  need  to  write  everything into  this  form  here  now,  into  this  one. Of  course,  you  say  I  don't  like  the  matrix. Then  you  have  to  make  sure that  you  write  down the  cose  function  and  with a  bunch  of  this  kind  of  equality  constraint, where  you  should  identify which  variable  is  snack  variable, plus  variable  and  the so  called  tip  variables. Right.  Go,  good. Some  example  here  now. In  these  cases,  if I  give  you  one  example  like  this  one. If  I  write  in  this  manner, you  should  quickly  read  it. In  this  standardized  form, because  x4x5  has  a  bar  over  it, I  know  it's  a  so  called  artificial  variable. When  I  have  art  variable, I  will  expect  a  penalty penalty  term  in  your  co  function. Any  other  variables  over  bar, represent  the  either  surplus  variables, snack  variables,  or the  original  variable  in  your  problem  there. Once  you  have  this  formulation, you  can  easily  choose  a  itial  condition. Then  the  ABC  now  is  easy  they  can read  the  everybody  knows that.  The  matric  pent. For  the  itial  condition,  you  can  say, Oh,  I  can  set  x  1x2x0. Then  x  bar  x  bar equals  to  1015  respectively.  There  you  go. You  got  the  it  condition. All  right.  So  far  so  good. This  is  actually  another  example, how  you  put  the  following  things into  standard  matric  form. You  look  at  this  one, you  want  to  maximize  something. You  pay  attention  to the  type  of  these  constraints. If  the  constraints  all  less  than equal  to,  I'm  perfectly  fine. Because  you  know  you  only  need  to introduce  the  snack  variables. This  is  the  best  situation. You  know  that  I  have  two  constrains  here. I'm  going  to  introduce  two  snack  x3xf. I  will  transform  everything  into  equality and  rewrite  things  into  a  matrix  four. Okay.  So  now  I  have  A,  B,  and  C, and  then  I  can  write  into  z  equal  to c  transpose  x  subject  to  the  Ax  equals  b, and  then  x  has  all  be  non  negative. In  addition,  you  can  quickly identify  the  itial  values. You  can  easily  set  x1x2  equals  zero, then  x  three  and  x  four  with a  value  of  five  and  four  respectively. Of  course,  you  can  also  say, what  about  the  set  x3x  equals  zero, for  example,  x  equals  zero,  x  equal  zero? Of  course,  you  can  do  that.  In  other  words, you  have  a  different  way to  choose  ital  condition. Exactly  how  to  choose  the  dial  conditions. Then  that's  actually  related  to the  so  called  number  of freedoms  of  your  problem. In  a  moment,  I'm  going  to  actually  talk  about how  many  al  conditions  you  can  quickly  guess. Right?  To  have  a  better  understanding of  the  solvability  of  the  LP  problem. We  introduce  certain  pro, very  unique  property  of  LP  problem  there. We're  going  to  first  describe the  so  called  the  solution set  of  the  LP  problem. We  define  a  set  of points  or  the  region  in  a  space, possibly  high  dimensional  space. If  it's  called  convex  means  what? For  any  point,  x  y  in  this  set. If  this  near  combination  is  also  inside  S, where  r  is  0-1, then  we  say  that  this  set  S  is  convex. Basically  means  that  you pick  any  two  points  in  the  set, and  then  any  point  on the  line  segment  linking this  two  point  will  also  be  in  the  set. Then  we  know  that  the  S  is  convex. That's  what  you  have  already learned  in  the  near  algebra, It  turns  out  actually  the  LP  problems, the  solution  set  must  be  a  convex. That's  fantastic.  Because  for  the  convex  set, you  have  a  beautiful  property. The  property  actually  says that  it's  a  stream  point. The  equine  point,  well, the  equ  point  means  basically  point. I  mean,  this  is  a very  unofficial  stating  low. The  eche  point  basically  is the  point  that  minimize or  maximize  a  cost  function. You  know  that  for  the  LP  problem, all  these  equine  point must  lie  on  the  boundary. Most  on  the  boundary. Actually,  mostly  is  a  line on  the  so  called  vertices. Of  course,  in  some  cases, the  any  point  on the  one  boundary  could  be  the  solution. In  other  words,  you  have a  influent  extreme  point. Optimal  point  exam.  That's  possible. But  you  on  need  to  find  one  that's  enough. Later  on,  we  going  to  say  that the  Synplex  method  will  guarantee  that  you're going  to  find  solution  over  one  vertex. That's  the  beauty  of  the  synplex  method. But  the  symplex  method,  this  beauty  depends on  the  L,  the  property. That  means  all  the  solution  actually, the  optimal  solution  is achievable  on  the  boundary. Yes.  That's  what  we  have,  right? Okay.  Before  we  tap  into  the  symplex  method. We  would  like  to  first  introduce another  simple  method. Then  we  emphasize  why do  we  need  a  symplex  method. The  motivation  we  do  this  one. For  that,  actually,  we  need  to  introduce something  called  graphic  method. We  take  a  short  break,  then  we  come back  to  study  the  graphic  method. Then  we  move  on  to  introduce officially  the  Synplex  method. We  take  a  short  break,  ten  minute  break. This  part  may  be  symple  for  most  of  you. Actually,  the  Synplex  method is  very  commonly  used  tool. If  you  guys  are  actually  doing  optimization, you've  been  solving  the  LP, you  probably  already  learned  that. If  you  do,  already  learned  this  one, you  just  sit  back,  do  your  own  things, but  as  long  as  they  don't  make  noise. But  later  part  to analyze  the  robustness of  your  Synplex  method, and  that  one  might be  interesting  to  you  guys. We  take  a  short  break. We  come  back  to  the  lecture. Now,  in  the  previous  session, we  officially introduced  the  LP  problem  there. Now  we  talk  about  how  to  solve  it. In  case  that  you  don't  have  many  variables. For  example,  you've  got  two  variables. Then  we  can  vis we  can  visualize  the  physi  region. Then  on  top  of  that  by  using the  property  of  all  the  extreme  values actually  on  the  boundary  of  the  physi  region. We  can  identify  which  one is  the  true  optimal  point. That's  actually  the  motivation of  using  something  called  a  graphic  method. Take  a  look  at  this  example  here. Assume  that  I  want  to maximize  something  subject  to this  kind  of  constraint  there, they  are  equality  and  less  than  equal  to. That's  good.  Because  we  know  that  you don't  need  to  introduce any  so  called  artificial  variables. That's  fantastic.  I  don't  need  to introduce  any  penalty  terms. Okay? Now  here  you  go.  This  is actually  the  plot  of  the  fasial  region. Now  you  see  how  I  got  one,  two,  three,  four, five,  I  got  five  construing. Each  constrain  represents  one  line, splitting  the  two  d  space. I'm  going  to  have  a  five  line here  line  segment, line  actually, they  intersect  with  each  other, and  you  can  easily  show that  the  region  bonded by  the  red  line  segment  is  the  fasial  region. Each  one  corresponding  to one  of  the  construing. Now  the  question  is  that  Within this  range  with  this  region, which  one  will  give  me  the  best  solution? I  know  that  from  here, one  of  these  verdicts will  give  me  the  best  solution. But  which  one? In  the  cases,  we  need  to incorporate  your  cost  function into  the  picture. Here  you  go.  I  think  something  wrong  here. Basically,  this  is  actually  is  a  vector  here. Okay.  The  blue  line  er  line represent  the  gradient, the  gradient  of  your  course  function. You  know  how  to  ****  the  gradient. You  take  the  partial  dit  over  x one  and  x  two  respectively,  you  got  a  vector. The  actor  actually  basically just  consists  of  the  coefficients  here. Ten,  20,  is  a  vector. They  represent  a  line  segment in  the  two  d  space. This  one  is  actually the  gradient  of  your  course  function. Then  we  know  that for  if  you  set this  course  function  equals  a  cont  C, for  example,  that  one  corresponding  to one  line  perpendicular  to  this  direction. I  think  let  me  see  how  tos,  that's  right. The  purple  one.  You  call the  benefit  line  here. The  line,  you  can  moving  up  and  down. For  every  purple  line, the  corresponding  to  one  value, one  spec  value  of  this  course  function. When  you  change  the  z  value  here, and  then  this  purple  line basically  moving  up  and  down. We  know  that  when  you  do  the  maximization, the  gradient  of  the  function  always  give  you the  value  increasing, increasing  directions  there. That  means  if  you're going  to  maximize  this  thing, you  know  that  when  you  push the  purple  line  upward, you  will  get  bigger  and  bigger, cos  funding  value. You  can  see  hole. The  purple  line  because  it's  infinite  hole, it's  a  line  infinite,  they  will  possibly intersect  with  your  physical  region. You  keep  moving  this  purple  line  upward, increasing  the  cost  function  value until  at  a  certain  point, I  will  not  touch the  physical  region  anymore if  you  move  further. That  is  the  boundary  case. You  can  think  about  that.  Just  look  at  it. If  I  move  this  purple  line  upward, what  vertex  will  be the  last  one  touch before  you  move  away from  the  physical  region. Just  just  visualize  it. This  one  will  be  the  last  one. This  one  will  be  the  last  one. Therefore,  this  one  will be  your  optimal  solution. Well,  the  proof  very  straightforward. First  of  all,  you  know  that  this  line is  on  the  purple,  the  purple  perpendicular. In  other  words,  this  one will  generate  at  this  point, it  will  generate  one  the  cost  punking  value. In  addition,  because  this  point  actually  is inside  is  still  inside  the  physical  region. Therefore,  at  this  point, the  x1x2  value  satisfy the  constraint,  all  of  them. Finally,  because  you  move  this  one  upward, that  means  that  the  cost  function values  keep  increasing. Until  you  cannot  increase  further, because  otherwise  it  will  go out  of  this  physical  region. Therefore,  at  that  moment, the  cost  function  incurred  by  the  value  of x1x2  at  this  point  is  the  best  solution. That's  a  very  simple  proof  or simple  informal  proof  then. If  I  want  to  ask  you  to  minimize, if  I  want  to  minimize  this  course  function, what  would  be  the  value  that  minimize  it? If  I  want  to  minimize it,  then  what  should  I  do? You  guys  have  learned  the  gradient  before. A  function  gradient  give  you the  increase  of  the  function  value. If  you  want  to  minimize  what  does  mean. I  want  to  decrease  the  function  value. Which  direction  I  should  go? I  should  go  opposite. I  should  go  site. That  means  I'm  going  to  move in  the  purple  line  in  the  opposite  direction. If  you  move  this  purple  line, what  would  be  the  last point  in  the  physical  region  you're  going to  touch?  This  point. You  can  think  about  it.  You  just  slide, use  a  ruler  in  the  exam. If  I  give  this  question, you  must  have  a  ruler  there. You  move  this  ruler  up  and  down. Until  you  find  the  point in  the  physical  region, that  will  be  the  last  point  you touch  by  the  proper  line. If  I  minimize  something, you  know  this  one  goes  here  and  the  zero, zero  is  the  last  point  you  touch. That  means  that  when  you minimize  this  cost  function, the  minimum  value  is  zero because  you'll  take  x  equal  zero, x  equal  zero.  But  this  is  obvious. If  you  look  at  the  css  fun  itself, of  course,  one  x  equal  zero, x  equals  zero  is the  point  for  the  minimum for  the  minimum  value. Because  we  know  x1x2 must  all  be  non  negative. This  so  called  graphic  method, give  you  a  very  beautiful  way  to plot  the  solution.  All  right. Go,  go  up  and  down  and  In  a  quiz, I  do  need,  if  I'm  asking  you, use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  LP  problem. A  several  steps. The  first  step  is  that  you're  going  to actually  determine  all  this  boundary. Basically,  you  want  to determine  the  physical  region. By  plot,  every  boundary  line  segment, then  decide  what  is  the  physical  region. The  second  one  is  that  you  need  to determine  the  gradient  of  your  cost  function. Okay.  You  need  to  explicitly  pw  the  gradient. I  know  that  certain  direction we  leading  to  the  strict  increase of  your  function  value. Then  you  draw  the  so  called benefit  line,  the  purple  one. Indicating  that  well,  any  point  on the  purple  line  corresponding  to a  specific  cost  function  value. Then  you  start  to  sliding down  and  show  me  where the  purple  line  will  touch the  best  solution  point in  your  physical  region. There's  a  several  ingredients  I  must  see, in  your  solution  strategy  in  your  paper. Indicate  that  you  really  know  how  to use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  the  problem  there. Now,  in  case  that  I  want  you  to  ask  to solve  the  so  called  integer  programming. You  know  that  integer  program is  equally  complex, because  it's  MP  heart. The  symplex  method  cannot solve  the  integer  programming  problem. You  have  to  go  through  something called  branching  bound. But  the  graphic  method can  actually  allow  you  to  solve  it. What  you  need  to  do  is  that basically  you  find all  these  so  called  discrete  values or  integer  value  point within  the  physical  region. Then  again,  you  sliding this  purple  line  up  and  down  until  you touch  the  one  best  integer  point inside  the  region.  Then  you  have  it. It's  really  powerful. The  graphic  method  allow  you  to solve  not  only  just  LP  problem, but  also  the  integer  problem  as  well, integ  program  problem  as  well. But  what  is  the  assumption constrain  you  have  to  impose when  you  use  a  graphic  method, you  cannot  have  more  variables. Actually,  ideally, they  can  also  solve  the  CD  problem, but  it's  hard  to  see  it  on  a  piece  of  paper. Our  human  eyes  can  only visualize  a  CD  object. The  CD  is  the  most  complicated  situation. We  can  still  use  a  graph  to  solve. But  once  you  have  more  than  three  variables, Then  you  know  that  you cannot  rely  on  the  graphic  method  anymore. You  need  a  more  advanced algebraic  solution  strategy  to  solve  it. That's  the  simplex  method  come  into  picture. Don't  blindly  use  a  simplex  method. If  you  can  use  a  graphic  method,  use  it. Be  a  graphic  method  is  very  easy  to use  guaranteed  to  be correct  because  you  can  visualize  it. If  you  have  a  small  lamb  of variable  dealing  with  integer  programming, use  a  graphic  method  as  well. Q  unless  you  cannot  use a  graphic  method  because of  too  many  variables, you  go  for  the  needed  programming. In  case  dealing  with the  integral  programming, you  have  to  go  for  the  branch  in bound  and  more  a  branching  cut, more  advanced  techniques, but  the  complexity will  increase  dramatically. All  right.  Let's  take  a  look  at  the  example. If  I  want  to  solve other  problems,  just  one  exercise. Let  me  just  try  to  If I'm  going  to  solve  any  problem, The  procedure  you  have  the  bear in  mind.  What  is  the? If  I  give  you  maximize  mimi  doesn't matter  because  graphic  method  doesn't  matter a  mimize  to  maximize  as  long  as  I  need  LP, If  I  want  to,  for  example,  ma, something  like  the  three  x  one  plus, maybe  four  X  two. The  subject,  I  don't  know,  I  mean, two  x  one  plus  x  two  is  no  more  than  four, make  the  easy,  maybe the  x  one  plus  two  x two  is  no  more  than  three, for  example,  just  for  illustration  no. Then  you  have  x  one  is  zero, and  x  two  is  x  I  just  make  it  simple. How  am  I  supposed  to  use a  graphic  way  to  solve  it? Now,  let's  first  draw  the  first  step. You  need  to  be  traming  the  region. You  find  a  feasible  region. Three. Find  a  feasible  region  there. You  do  need  a  ruler. In  a  quiz,  for  example, you  are  encouraged  to  bring  the  ruler. I'm  going  to  actually  use  x1x2,  zero,  one, two,  three,  four,  and  also  one, two,  three,  and  four. Two,  four,  two,  and  four. You  first  determine  what  is the  the  physical  region  there. The  deal  with  this  cont  one by  one,  deal  with  the  first  one. You  first  find  a  boundary, two  x  one  plus  x  two  equal  to  four. Then  you  know  that  one  x  to equals  zero  x  y  equal  to  two, one  x  y  equal  to  zero,  x  equal  to  f, this  guy,  then  you  know  that actually  you  have  a  line  like  this  one. I  mean,  This  is  the  one. You  can  say  this  is  two  x one  plus  x  two  equals  four, and  you  can  actually  pick  one  point. Either  on  the  left  hand  side or  right  hand  side. For  example,  I  chose  zero,  zero, I  know  that  you  put  x  one  equals  zero, x  equals  zero,  then strictly  says  finding  equality. Therefore,  you  know  that  this  side basically  is  visible  towards  the  left  side. Then  draw  the  second  one. The  second  one  say,  well, x  one  equals  zero, x  two  equal  to  1.5,  f  should  be  here. One  x  equal  zero, x  one  equals  three,  you'd  be  here. Now  I  got  another  one here,  basically  this  one  now. That  basically  give  you  the  x one  plus  two  x  two  equals  to  three. Now,  what  could  be  the  side  of  the  feasible? Well,  I  mean,  you  know  that  you  either this  side  or  the  other  side you  choose  zero,  zero  again. Then  it  sets  by  the  equality. Therefore,  and  this  side actually  is  also  the  physical  side. Then  of  course,  you  also  have  X one,  non  zero,  x2n0. In  other  words,  this  one  and  this  guy. In  the  end,  this  small  triangle is  the  physical  region  there.  So  far  so  good. Sorry,  I  have  the  two  small  now. I  didn't  realize  actuals  region  is  so  small. Then  the  next  one  is  you draw  the  second  step is  that  you  have  to  draw  the  gradient, the  gradient  of  your  course  function  there. You  know  the  gradient of  the  course  function  is  what? Assume  this  is  actually  F.  X1x2. The  gradient  of  the  F  equals  to one  equals  to three  and  four,  is  a  vector  here. It's  a  vector  here.  X  y  is  three. X  two  is  a  four  here. Okay  fine.  You  have  like  this  gin. This  is  actually  the  three  and  four. Now  you  the  gradient, the  gradient  of  this  cost  function. The  rest  of  part  is  just  a  sight now  you  draw  the  so  called. I  cannot  use  a  color  log, but  this  dash  line  is  the  benefit  line. Now  you  start  to  move the  benefit  line  up  and  down. Now  if  I  don't  draw  further, if  you  can  see  right  now the  dash  line  does  not touch  any  physical  region. You  keep  juping  back  until  at  certain  point, you're  going  to  touch  the  first  point in  the  physical  region,  which  one? Which  point  will  be  in  the  physical  region? You  can  see  I  keep  moving  this  way. I  keep  moving  this  way. Now,  which  point  in  your  physical  region, which  is  more  triangle, would  be  the  first  point touched  by  your  benefit  line? Which  one?  Which  one  could  be? You  need  to  have  some  imagination  here  now. You  move  this  one  down  now, one  if  were  going  to touch  the  first  point  in  this  triangle. Uh,  which  one? You  know  actually  1.5  Bcf  whole. This  is  a  line  here.  Now  you have  another  line  here. If  I  amplify  this  region  here. This  is  actually  the  region  here. If  I  amplify  it,  you  have  is  this  guy. Now  you  have  this  one  here. You  have  this  one  here. This  is  actually  the  part  of  the  so called  two  x  one  plus  two  equals  four. This  one  is  the  so  called x  1p2x2  equals  three, then  you  have  the  so  called gradient  of  the  cose  function. Now  this  gradient  start  to  move. Among  the  four  point  here, which  one  will  be  touched  the  first? Which  one? Without  a  further  calculation, I  I  rural,  I guess  this  point  will be  the  first  point  touched. Visualization.  I  don't  even calculate.  I  visualize  it. Now  this  point  is possibly  the  first  point  touched. If  I  did,  indeed, this  point  is  the  first  point  touched, tell  me  what  is  this  point? What  is  this  point?  It's  a  vertex. It's  intersection  of  the  two  line. What  are  two  lines  there? One  line  is  two  x one  plus  x  two  equals  to  four. The  other  one  is  x  one plus  two  x  two  equals  to  three. Basically,  this  is  the  point. You  solve  these  two  equations, you  determine  x1x2, and  that's  your  best  solution. Everything  is  visualized. You  visualize  the  solution  directly. In  an  exam,  of  course, try  now  to  draw  such  a  small  picture. It's  very  hard  to  see. Try  to  make  the  picture  as  big  as  possible. You  can  easily  accurately  move your  ruler  up  and  down and  identify  the  best  point. But  the  bottom  ne, the  best  point  must  be  on  the  boundary, actually  it  must  be  one  of  the  vertex. Even  though  in  case  that some  line  segment  are  all  best  solution, but  you  can  always choose  the  end  point,  the  one  of  vertex. That's  a  pick  one  specific  open  solution. I  hope  you  remember  that's the  so  called  graphic  method. Understand  the  procedure,  and I'm  going  to  give  a  few  exercise  later  on. You  can  practice  home, and  when  we  introduce  the  Synplex  method, and  we  will  also  use  a  graphic  way  to show  what  is the  actual  effect  of  using  Synplex. You  can  clearly  visualize  how the  Synplex  method  really works  in  the  picture. This  is  actually  something  quite  fun. I  think  the  slides  already  be  given. There's  a  second  deck  of slides  in  the  course  website. You  only  need  to  look  at  the  graphic  method. You  don't  need  to  look  at  any  other  signal. This  one  is a  brief  introduction  of  the  graphic  method. Now  we  come  back  to the  The  original.  Oh,  sorry. Sorry.  This  one  I  have  to  go  back  to the  Okay.  All  right. So  now  we  come  back  to the  original  the  slides. Now  we're  going  to  try  to  start to  introduce  the  so  called  Synplex  method. Now,  to  understand  the  Synplex  method, we  need  to  understand something  called  basic  variables. What's  the  basic  variables? Now,  take  a  look  at  the  definition  here. Try  to  understand  what is  the  basic  variables? Let's  first  to  take  a  look  at  what's the  basic  pas  solutions.  Okay. Assuming  that  actually,  you have  this  kind  of  expressions, representing  a needed  combination  of  the  vectors. I  hope  you  guys  still remember  the  need  algebra. I  hope  you  guys  still  remember. Let  me  just  try  to  hold.  Okay. When  I  write  the  A  x  equals  a  B  here, A  can  be  written  as  columns, like  A  one,  A  two, and  all  the  way  for  example, A  n.  You  have x1x2  and  all  the  way  to x  n  equals  a  b  here  now. Then  based  on  the  india  algebra, I  know  that  left  in  side basically  equals  to  x  one  times  A  one plus  x  two  times  A  two  plus all  the  way  plus  x  n  times  A  equals  B. That's  what  we.  Once  the  b  is given  and  you  essentially  try to  find  the  x1x2  to  x  in  value, so  this  equality  holds. Now  the  question  is  that  how many  different  solution  you  may  find. One  is  the  solution  because  one  solution is  basically  formed  by  this  vector. I'm  going  to  ask  you  how many  needly  independent  vectors, The  x  vectors  you  can find,  satisfy  the  equation. A  collection  of  all  those  independent  vectors is  basically  gave  you  some  basic  solution. This  one,  if  I  ask  you, how  many  need  independent  vectors  you can  find  because  every  one  vector set  by  equation  is  one  solution. You  have  a  bunch  of  of  of  vectors. But  how  many  vectors  are  need  independent. That's  related  to  what.  I  determined  by  what? If  I  give  you  so  called the  times  n.  This is  actually  basically  times  one  here  now. This  is  also  times  one  here  or the  M  Then  tell me  assuming  that  A  is  a  full  rank. That  means.  Assuming  that  actually is  small  n  here. That  means  you  have  a  long  matrix,  not  p  one. Now  tell  me  how  li  independent  vector  x you  can  find.  All  right. You  know,  any  X  can be  written  as  in  two  parts. The  one  part  is  a  very  special  solution. The  other  one  is  something called  solution to  the  homogeneous  equation  there. Where  the  A  x  zero  equals  zero, and  A  x  S  equals  B. You  choose  not  uniquely,  choose  ate  xs. Make  this  one  hold.  Then  you  solve another  homogeneous  equations,  find  x  zero. Now  the  question  is  that, how  many  choices  of  x  zero  you  have. Everybody  know  the  lid  algebra. You  know  what  I'm  talking  about  here. The  collection  of  the  t  x zero  form  a  subspace. Tell  me  what  the  dimension  of  the  subspace. What's  the  dimension  of  the  subspace? Yeah.  What  is  that? If  I  say  it's  equal  to  a  minus  m,  am  I  right? The  dimension  of  the  x  basically  is  in the  space  in  the  nu  space. The  dimension  of  the  nun  space  is  the  n, is  the  nullity  of  A, which  is  equals  to  n  minus  m.  This basically  is  the  dimension of  the  space  formed  by  all  the  x  zero. In  other  words,  if  you  tell me how  many  different  solution  you  might  have, and  it's  determined  by the  dimension  of  long  space. We're  going  to  actually  use  this  one  when we  try  to  introduce the  basic  variables  and  non  basic  variables. We  need  to  know  actually  roughly how  many  basic  solutions  we  may  have. Just  try  to  recall some  knowledge  about  the  algebra. Of  course,  if  I  don't  know  that, am  I  okay  with  this  class  with  this  course, sure,  there's  no  problem.  I  okay. But  if  you  actually  understand this  we  re  Sorry. Okay.  Come  back  now. All  right.  So  I  try  to just  briefly  refresh  your  memory about  the  linear  algebra. Now  we  kind  of  linear combination  of  this  column  of  A, A  one  A,  the  other  column  of  A  matrix  A. And  as  long  as  you  find  x  1x2tx  and  value, make  this  equation  holds, then  the  x12xn  is  one  feasible  solution. Fine.  So  good. Now  let's  see.  What  are  the  so called  the  basic  solutions  there. Now,  previously,  I  already  mentioned  that. If  your  A  rank is  M  is  a  full  rank  for  example, that  means  that  at  least  you  have a  so  called  nearly independent  A  vectors  columns  there. Then  what  is  the  basic  solution we're  talking  about  here? A  basic  solution  to  the  previous  one, that's  my  previous  I mentioned  here  or  this  guy  here to  this  equation  here is  in  a  matrix  form  now. A  basic  solution  to  this  equation set  one  is  obtained by  setting  because  of  now, setting  minus  s  of the  x  variables  equals  to  zero. Basically,  I  said  x  zero, previously  mentioned  x  zero  to  be  zero,  no, I  don't  care  anymore  because  they  are essentially  the  solution  to the  homogeneous  solution.  I  don't  care. You  said  those  one  all  become  zero. Then  the  remaining  part  will  give you  the  pas  basic  pasib  solutions. That  means  basically, I  have  how  many  of these  choice  now  because  of  the  here. I'm  going  to  set  n  minus variable  become  zero.  I  don't  care  anymore. Now  the  rest  is  just  the variable  or  n  variable  value, you  need  to  determine. But  how  many  choices  you're  going  to  have. In  this  case,  you  can  prove  that. You  can  show  that.  You  actually  this  is a  commutatory  as  Out  of  n  variables, you  pick  variable  value. Determine  variable  values. How  many  different  options, different  assign  you  got? For  example,  if  the  n  is  a  four  variable, the  m  is  a  two  variable. Now  you  have  a  c  f  two. You  have  a  six  different  assignment. You  can  anticipate  about  six  boundary  point. Every  boundary  point  give  you one  basic  pas  solution. This  formula  actually  give  you the  boundary  points,  beautiful. If  you  want  to  visualize  it, then  you  are  essentially  say  that  I give  you  M  construing. The  intersection  of  the  Ms give  you  one  vertex. Every  tax  basically  is one  intersection  point  of some  boundary  functions  there. If  I  gave  you,  for  example, the  region  like  square. Okay  region  like  a  square  there. Try  to  think  about  it, actually  it's  not  critical. Just  is  a  good  actually  for you  to  improve  your  understanding. You  can  roughly  estimate how  many  boundary  I'm  going  to  deal  with. If  I  give  you  this  of  things  here, and  this  is  x1x2. I  know  I  got  one,  two,  three,  four. I  got  four  boundary  there. I  got  basically then  you're  going  to  ask  yourself, this  one  basic  come from  how  many  constraints? If  you  write  the  constraints  there, how  many  constraint  you  got? B  care.  Actually,  this  one  is  a  fun  thing. For  example,  this  is  one  constraint the  other  one  is  another  constraint. Then  you  have,  basically  if  I  write  the  A is  M  times,  what  is  the  M  here? What's  the  M  here?  M  two. You  got  two  equations  there. And  what  is  the  n  here, how  many  variable?  How  many  variable  d? Can  I  say  two,  B cafe  because  I  need  to  write  P. N  two  standard  form. The  constraint  must  be  all  equality. This  one  give  you  inequality. I  need  to  introduce  more  variables, how  many  more  variable  I  got. Two  more  at  least. You  should  have  a  four  variable  ser. Now,  this  is  a  here. Now  I  got  a  four  variable. Now  how  many  boundary  point I  could  anticipate, how  many  vertex  anticipate. Take  two  point  out  of  four,  how  many? Six.  Four  times  3/2,  six. Now  what  happened  to  this  guy? This  is  like  a  graphic  way. What  happened  to  this  one  here? Is  actually  any  mismatching  here? No.  This  is  a  graphic  was dealing  with  original  variable  set. Now  you're  dealing  with  the  LP  actually is  waste  augmented  variable  in  it. There's  no  contradiction  here  because  for. You  have  to  think  phone  now. I'm  just  using some  very  simply  example  to  show. Then  you  realize  that  if  you  can actually  later  on  use the  so  called  synflax  things, you  have  to  blow  up  the  number  of  variables. That  one  also  shows  another  way the  advantage  of  using  graphic  method. Graphic  method  only  talk about  the  origin  number  variables. Point. Now  understand,  every  basic  solution is  basically  set all  those  x  zero  term  become  zero, and  then  the  remaining  variables  value from  one  basic  solution. I  know  how  many  basic  solution  I  can choose  determined  by  the  C  to  take  out  of. That's  good. That's  the  first  interesting complexity  you  anticipate. Of  course,  immediately  from  this  formula, you  already  know  that  I  if  n  is  ten, if  my  M  is  five,  for  example, or  even  two,  then  you  already  know  that I'm  going  to  encounter  a  huge  number of  this  basic  exclusion. This  is  horrible. Manually  I  cannot  enumerate. That's  act  the  motivation  of  using  symplex. But  symplex  is  not  really  something  magic. It  has  a  very, very  deep  collection  with  the  lid  algebras. Understand  the  lidia  algebra principle  behind  the  symplex  method. That's  what  we  try  to  learn. Now  with  this  a  so called  basic  physical  solution and  you  anticipate  how  many basic  solution  you  look  you  have. Actually,  you  can  easily later  on  can  show  that every  basic  solution  is give  you  one  extreme  point. You  optimal  solution  must be  coming  out  of  the one  of  the  basic  solution.  Okay? That's  cool  part.  All  right. Okay.  Here  is  some  factor  here  now. I  think  that  previously  we  already mentioned  just  repeating  here now.  We  don't  need  to. Now  this  is  some  example. How  do  you  get the  basic  physical  solution  here? Now,  consider  the  previous  example. I  want  to  minimize  this  cost  function  here. A  Z  I  have  a  two  liar  un  equality  here. I  know  that  this  is  good because  it's  less  than  equal  to. In  other  words,  I  only  need  to introduce  the  snack  variable. I  don't  have  artificial  variables, I  don't  need  to  introduce  any  panty  term. I  should  have  a  full  variables  coming  now. X  1x2xx  four. Good.  That's  cool. Now  I  have  this  a  transformed  form. From  here,  I  can  easily  write down  my  matrix  A.  Oh, just  a  two  row  here. The  first  row  is  341,  zero. Be  careful  now.  3410,  that's the  first  row  of  the  matrix  A. The  second  row  of  the  matrix  A  is  two, one,  zero  and  one, two,  one,  zero,  one. That's  actually  form  of  matrix  A. Now  if  you  split  the  columns, you  have  32  is  a  column  one, four  is  a  column  two, and  then  the  10  is  column  three, and  the  zero  is  a  column  four. That's  actually  four  columns  of the  matrix  A.  This  is  a  B  here. You  are  essentially  write your  final  solution  in  this  form. I  know  that  my  matrix  A actually  has  the  rank  two, I  au  prove  that  actually  is  a  ranked  tool. You  can  find  the  two  near independent  this  ctondtor. That  means  my  is  a  tool, and  I  know  that  how many  choice  of  the  x  1x2xx  four, forming  the  so  called  basic  solution  I  have. Well,  I  use  the  formula  C  four, I  should  anticipate  six Six  basic  values, basic  solution  solution  step. You  can  actually  list  them  all. You  can  list  them  all  by choosing  different  x  1x2xx  four  value. You  are  able  to  find  the  six. The  different  basic  solution  state. Of  course,  it  still  takes  some  time. Take  some  time  to  find  them. But  at  least  you  can  quickly  find  one. For  example,  I  can  set  x equal  zero  x  two  equal  zero, then  I  have  x  and  x  four,  is  one  solution. I  can  set  any  two  become  a  zero. The  other  two  become  a  basic  variable. That's  give  you  one  quick  solution, one  basic  solution. You  can  also  set  x  equal  zero, x  equal  zero,  and  then  x1x2  give  a  solution. You  can  set  x  one  and x  equal  zero  and  so  and  so  forth. That's  how  you  actually  eventually determine  the  different basic  solutions  there. Just  f  this  in  mind. Every  basic  solution  is on  the  boundary  of  the  physical  region  there. That  one  is  not  too  obvious. Not  too  obvious. But  you  have  to  think  carefully, how  the  boundary  point  or the  vertex  in the  high  dimensional  space  is  created. I  don't  need  to  explain  here, but  you  can  think  about  if  you guys  like  the  geometry, you  can  think  about  how  do  you  get the  vertex  in  a  high  dimensional  space. Right.  All  right. Now,  with  all  these  set  up, this  is  actually  the  list  of all  these  six  solution,  right? If  you  look  at  the  solution  itself, you  realize  that  you  see  the  first  solution, you  set  x1x2  equals  zero. The  second  one  said  x  two  and  x  equal  zero. You  see  that  any  time  every time  two  variables  value  become  zero, and  you  solve  the  other  tool. That's  how  the  compute comes  out  come  into  picture. Take  out  of  n.  You  go, equal  two,  the  equal  four. I  got  six  different  six, and  they  are  all  linearly  independent. Okay?  No,  actually,  sorry  about  that  one. No,  they  are  not,  right? Because  you  only  got  a  four. You  only  have  a  four, but  they  are  actually  forming the  six  vertices  of  your  region. Okay?  Right.  That's  cool.  R. Okay.  That's  the  something. Aware.  Now,  if  I  want  to  now  using the  graphic  way  to visualize  it  to  visualize  it. In  this  case,  the  same  problem  and  I draw  the  feasible  region  here. I  have  how  many  vertices  I  got, one,  two,  three,  four. I  only  have  vertices. But  previously,  I  actually end  up  with  six  points. The  reason  is  because  in  the  syn  plax  method, in  this  exploded  enlarged  space, you  introduce  two  more  variables  in  it. It  doesn't  really  say that  these  two  guys  actually not  matching or  inconsistent,  no,  they  are  not. They  are  just  um dealing  with  different  number  variables. In  the  example,  in  the  quiz, at  least,  if the  variable  number  is  not  too  big, I  will  strongly  recommend  you  to  also  use a  graphic  way  to  solve the  same  problem  and to  see  whether  your  solution  makes  sense. This  is  a  quick  way  to  check. Unless  the  number  variable  is too  big,  then  there's  no  a  choice. Okay.  So  fossil  good.  So  fossil  good. Okay.  This  is  actually  Now, we  have  introduced a  so  called  basic  solutions, and  we  know  that  the  basic  solution  is derived  by setting  some  variables  value  to  zero. L  ater  on,  we  will  we  will say  that  those  variables whose  value  set  to  zero  is called  long  basic  variables. They  can  be  secrefed. I  don't  care  anymore,  just  set  them  zero. The  remaining  variables  that  constitute your  basic  solutions is  called  basic  variables. Not  going  to  play  the  key  role in  the  synplex  method. This  one  actually  shows that  the potential  computational  complexity  law. If  you  want  to  use  a  brute  force  method to  enumerate  all  the possible  basic  solutions, then  pick  one,  pick  the  best  one. You're  going  to  take  a  lot  of  time  there. You  can  imagine  if  I  got 20  variables,  ten  cons, how  many  actually  basic  basic  solutions  I'm going  to  deal  with  the  more  than  180,000. You  cannot  do  it  with  that. We  need  to  find  a  simple  way  to  do  it. That's  actually  basically  just  how we  introduce  the  simplex  method. A  simple  method,  just  as  a  tar  method. It's  a  table.  You  just  manipulate with  the  entries  inside  the  table  there. Today  we'll  give  a  very  brief  introduction of  the  simplex  method. The  details  will  come  next  week. We're  going  to  spend  two  sessions, two  lectures  on  this  part. One  I'm  going  to  deal with  the  general  procedure of  using  synchrox  method. Then  we  talk  about  the  robustness. Under  what  conditions, if  your  parameters  or  some coefficients  in  your  LP  problem  changes, but  your  solution. The  solution  variable  still  unchanged, optimal  basic  variable  still  unchanged. Under  what  conditions  I  can  guarantee  that. That  will  be  taught  in  the  lecture. That  one,  I  would  say  perhaps the  most  complicated  part. For  the  first  tool, most  students  will  get  it. I  just  use  table. Everybody  use  the  table  do  it. But  if  I  ask  you,  in case  you  allow  to  change, the  parameters  in  your  form  LP  formula. What  kind  of  change  to  ensure  that the  optimal  basic  variable  is  still  the  same? That  one  is  something  quite  interesting because  they  essentially  tell you  the  stability  of  the  solution. We  take  a  short  break,  we come  back  and  start  to  introduce, how  do  you  basically  start  with a  simplex  method.  We  take  a  short  break. He We  come  back to  the  last  session  of  today's  lecture. Now  we're  going  to actually  start  to  introduce the  symplex  method, basically  simplex  procedure. The  first  important  step  is creating  a  so  called  simplex  table. Right.  Assuming  that actually  we're  going  to  deal with  optimization  problem  in terms  of  standardized  form. This  is  basically  is  a  cost  function, and  this  is  actually  the  constru  end, but  it's  already  written  in the  equality  Ax  equals  b. Then  all  these  variable  value  has  to be  long  negative.  So  good. Assuming  that  you  already  have  the  so called  it  value  Ital  solution, this  initial  solution  actually  tell  you  that which  are  some  v  value  has  to  be  zero. Some  may  not  be. From  these  kind  of  things, we  we  basically  are  written  in  this  table. This  is  just  first  illustration  of the  so  called  special  try to  distinguish  the  different type  of  variable  scanner. Now,  how  am  I  supposed to  interpret  this  one  here? The  first  column,  is  going  to  write  record? Those  variables  whose  value  are  not  zero. In  other  words,  later  on  I'm  going  to  give a  name  called  the  basic  variable. Those  are  some  recording  of  the  coefficient. You  can  read  here  is  basically  say,  Oh, A  times  x  transpose  equals  B. What  happened  to  this  guy  here? What  kind  of  this  guy  here,  B, the  C  transpose  is coefficient  of  your  course  function. You  have  a  C  transpose times  u  x  original  x  law. But  now  you  want  to  subtract  this  guy. I  what  doesn't  mean? You  can  see  what  happened. How  do  you  get  the  second  term  here? You  are  essentially  trying to  use  at  the  cos  function  side, the  c  t  times  x  minus  minus  c  zero  transpose A  times  x  equals  two  equals  to  one. Equals  to  something  minus  c  zero  transpose  B. In  other  words,  I'm  trying to  this  equality  into  cos  function. So  I'm  going  to  actually  to to  try  to  understand what  exactly  we're  talking  about  here. What  the  table  will  tell  you  here. Okay.  Look  at  how the  optimization  of  z  equals  to,  transpose  x. Subject  two.  A  x  equals  to  b,  right? Now,  if  I'm  going  to  actually  add  on. In  other  words,  if  I'm  going  to  also  treat this  one  as  one  equation. I  don't  distinguish  whether  it's  showing equation  or  cost  function equation,  doesn't  matter  now. They  are  just  a  bunch of  all  the  equation  here. You  try  to  find  x  to  set  the  equation. You  know  the  Z  now  is considered  also  as  a  variable. Whenever  you  have  x  choice  there, the  z  value  will  be  determined. But  I'm  going  to  treat the  z  as  a  part  of  the  variable. Although  I  don't  really  explicitly treat  z  as  a  decision  variable. But  anyway,  I  think  about  that  a  variable. Now  what  I  can  do  is  that  I  know  that A  x  minus  b  basically  equals  zero  now. I'm  going  to  combine  this  one to  this  formula. If  I  write  z  equals  to, the  c  transpose  minus  c  zero, something  like  A  here,  minus  B  here. What  happened?  I  sorry.  Plus,  I'm  sorry. Okay.  Now  you  know that  I'm  not  really  changing  anything. I'm  not  really  changing  anything  here. Because  this  guy  and this  one  already  through  this  equation, it  doesn't  really  add  anything  new, to  your  corres  function  there. However,  this  one  actually  essentially  say, I'm  now  doing  the  elementary rule  operation  here. I'm  actually  carried  out elementary  rule  operation. So  the  C  zero  is  essentially  corresponding  to all  the  elementary  rule  operation  on the  constrain  Aqu this  equation  in  term  the  matrix. I  guess  you  guys  still remember  how  do  you  solve  equations. Solving  near  equations  there. We're  using  elementary  rule  operation  to operate  over  the  coefficients of  every  equation  there, that  actually  captured  by  the  C  Z  rule  here. I  continuously  applied elementary  rule  operation on  A  and  B  simultaneously, and  then  it  will  not  change  anything  if  I  put them  into  my  cose  function  part. The  cos  function  is  still  only determined  by  the  first  part. This  one,  essentially  say  that  in  this  table, I  can  arbitrarly  carry  out elementary  role  operation  and  try  to transfer  the  role  of those  variables  so  that I  can  change  the  value  of  z  here. But  if  you  define  z  in  this  manner, it  is  not  changing your  original  cost  function  at  all  because these  two  terms  basically  will  cancel  each other  due  to  the  constraint  equalities  there. This  one  essentially  say  that  now, the  synplex  method  is  nothing  but a  systematic  way  of  applying elementary  row  operation  to transform  the  coefficients  in your  in  essentially  every  row of  your  equation  set,  okay? Essentially  disappeared? Oh.  Okay.  So  Yeah. This  is  actually  how you  read  the  table  there. This  one,  essentially,  I think  you  add  on because  A  x  equal  to b  here.  How  do  you  read  this  one? You  multiply  the  net  c zero  A  to  the  both  sides. You  add  them  to  the  last  row because  represent  like  a  co  function  there. I  don't  write  z  specific here  because  I  don't  care  about  the z.  I  know  this  is  my  target  co  function. It  could  be  any  value  as  long  as  I determine  the  x  value  the  binary  state. This  table  is  a  very  generic  Basically, the  first  column,  you  have  to identify  all  the  basic  variables. The  whose  value  contains  all  the  variables, whose  value  cannot  be  zero. And  all  other  variables  outside  x  zero, that  means  x  minus  x  zero. Any  variables  in  x  but  not  in  x  zero, is  called  a  non  basic  variables. Now,  from  this  table,  twice, this  table  basically  represent all  the  possible  elementary  row  operations. I'm  going  to  continuously apply  different  C  zero. C  zero  is  a  collection  of the  elementary  row  operation on  your  construing  equations. Then  bring  this  effect  to your  final  cose  function  part. But  exactly  what  we're  doing  here. This  one  looks  so  vague. Because  this  one  is  simply  just re  record  what  kind of  operation  we're  dealing  with. Now,  you  see  that  actually, we  are  trying  to distinguish  The  table,  actually, we  try  to  distinguish  minimization and  maximization  here. Minimization  I  use  a  minor  because  of  whole. If  maximization  I  use  the  other  way  around, look  like  a  stiff  table. But  it's  really  different  table  there. Take  a  look  at  these  two  things. Take  a  look  at  the  last  column  here. This  column  represent  minimization, say  C  transpose  minus  c0t  A  times  x, and  so  minus  or  plus  something  here. You  are  adding  this  row  to  this  roller. But  when  you  add  this  row the  second  row  to  the  last  row, you  multiply  the  negative  c  zero  transpoles on  both  sides.  Okay. But  if  I  do  the  maximization, it  seems  that  actually, I'm  going  to  multiply  negative  one,  in  front, two  entries  of  your of  the  last  row  of  the  previous  table  there. You  put  the  negative  sign  in  front. Basically,  you  will  derive another  table  corresponding  to  maximization. What  exactly  does  that  mean? Because  try  to  recall. When  I  minimize  this  one,  I  have  this  guy. If  I  want  to  think  about  this  one  like a  maximization,  what  you  got. You  can  transform  maximization into  minimization  by  what? For  the  negative  one  in  front. You  multiply  negative  one  in  front. You  are  essentially  trans  minimization into  maximization. That  is  what  happened  in  a  table  there. That  means  the  simplex  method. It  doesn't  really  matter whether  you're  doing minimization  or  maximization. I  mean,  the  procedure  is  the  same. Okay?  Right.  Okay. The  way  just  how you  organize  your  table,  right? Basically,  essentially  the coefficient  matrix.  Okay? No.  So  To  me, I'm  always  prefer  using  maximization. Because  I  find  that  maximization  is much  easier  to  remember, because  maximization  the  general  theory does  not  really  care whether  minimization  or  maximization. But  for  this  course,  I'm always  prefer  to  use  maximization. You  maximize  z  equals  to  c  transpose  x, and  then  subject  to  the  so  called  A  X Less  than  equal  to  B. That's  the  original  constraint. That  means  that  we  only  deal  with  s  equal  to. I  don't  want  to  introduce the  so  called  artificial  variables. After  including  the  so called  the  snack  variable, and  this  one  can  be  converted  into a  head  x  equals  to  B  head. In  this  course,  we  will always  treat maximization  just  for  simplicity. I  will  try  to  avoid  dealing with  the  so  called  artificial  variable. But  the  procedure  of  using syplex  can  be  applied to  minimization  as  well. The  minimization  typically  the  use, the  constraint  is  bigger  than  equal  to. This  is  just  like  a  convention. Maximization  inquality  is  always less  than  equal  to  there. Later  on,  we  talk  about  the  duality  theorem, and  then  we  will  see  how  do  you  transform the  M  two  max  and  vice  versa. They  are  basically  equivalent. Yeah.  Next  week, we'll  talk  about  the  duality  theorem. Now,  here  is  some  sort  of  procedure  now. Previously,  just  the  table. The  table  essentially  tell you  how  do  you  write  down. How  do  you  write  down  the  record  transform basically  record  original the  constraint  equations  into  this  table. I'm  going  to  give  an  example. Give  an  example,  you  can  see  what  exactly. The  C  zero  is not  original  part  of  the  things. The  C  zero  contains all  the  possible  elementary  row  operations. You  started  with  just  A  B  and  the  C  only. Now  you  gradually  apply  C zero  on  A  and  the  B  and  try  to  transform, which  also  bring  the changes  to  your  last  row, corresponding  to  cost  function. We're  going  to  try  to  use some  example  to  illustrate  law. Let's  first  try  to  write  down. Let's  just  give  an  example  to see  how  what  is  look  like, and  then  we  explain  step  by  step  law. Give  the  example  here. All  right.  All  right. So,  um  C  zero is  something  applied  to  the  A  and  the  B, and  one  particular  choice  of the  C  zero  actually  is basically  coefficient  of  those  kind of  special  variables  long, the  so  called  augmented variables  or  the  panal  the  term. When  you  deal  with  the  maximization,  I  mean, you  don't  have  a  equality  constraint or  the  art  variables, you  know  the  C  zero  is  always  zero. In  this  case  the  guys  disappeared. You  have  just  a  C  transpose  and  zero  here. Now  you  try  to  write down  the  table,  what  the  table  look  like. Let  me  try  to  I think  it's  a  reading  here  now. Hope,  good,  good.  Okay. First  of  all,  you  determine what  the  A  matrix. The  A  matrix  look  like  3410, 3410,  and  then  2101, two,  101,  that  matrix  A  here. Then  the  B  basic  just  126. This  row  actually  correspond  to two  different  individual  rows because  A  has  two  rows. If  you  write  carefully, you  should  have  let  me  just  try  to  R. Try  to  make  sure  that everybody  actually  starting  with a  very  engineering  way  of  writing. Now  the  problem  is  to  deal  with a  z  equals  to  negative  two  x one  minus  X  two  subject to  three  x  one plus  four  x  two  plus  x  three  equals  to  12, and  the  two  x  one  plus  x  two plus  x  four  equals  six, where  these  two  guys are  the  so  called  snack  variable. They  are  the  snack  variable  state. Variable  state.  Now,  how am  I  supposed  to  create  this  table  here? Normally,  we  write  down record  all  the  variables  one  by  one  here. Here,  actually  we  write, I  got  the  four  variable  now,  x  one, x  two,  x  three,  and  x  four,  write  here, x  one,  x  two, x  three,  and  then  you  have  a  B  here. That  the  B  basically. I'm  going  to  actually  use  snow  case  B  now, because  I  actually represent  every  single  entries. Now,  the  first  row, corresponding  to  the  coefficient of  your  first  const. You  have  three,  four, one,  zero,  and  your  b  is  12  here. I'm  going  to  write  it  down  here. The  second  row  corresponding to  your  second  const. You  have  a  two,  one, zero,  and  one  and  six. So  far  so  good.  Then  the  last  one actually  is  a  coefficient  of your  course  function  there. In  this  case,  because  I  need  to distinguish  whether  it  is  a  minimization and  a  maximization  there. Ideally,  in  this  course, we  will  always  deal  with a  maximization  just  for  simplicity  law. Assuming  that  you  try  to maximize  or  you  originally  if  the  mean  here, then  you  have  to  transform  this  one  into maximization  by multiplying  negative  one  in  front. Assuming  that  this  is  a  maximization. That's  just  a  minimization  here. If  a  minimization  here, this  is  not  what  I  want. I'm  going  to  transform this  one  into  maximization. Okay,  I'm  going  to  write  the  z equals  to  two  x  one  plus  x  two. Now  in  this  case,  I'm going  to  write  this  one  n  two, n  two,  this  last  row  here. I  have  two  is  a  coefficient  of  x one  and  one  cofi  x  two  and  zero  and  a  zero. Now,  what  happened  to  this  B? This  one  actually  is  a  z  value  here now.  What  should  I  put  here? It  depends  on  how  do  you start  with  the  initial  basic  solution. But  how  do  I  determine the  first  basic  solution  there? You  know  the  reason  we  introduce the  snack  variables  here  is to  let  all  the  original  variable to  take  value  zero. Let's  set  x1x2  become  zero. Then  x3x  become  my  basic  variable  now. Okay.  I  write  here. I  record.  In  this  case I  was  set  x  y  equal  zero, x  two  equals  zero, then  I  know  that  set  x  one  equal  to  zero, x  two  equal  to  zero because  they  are  not  basic  variable. Then  x  three  now  is chosen  at  12  because look  at  the  first  equation. If  x  one,  x  to  become  a  zero  now, x  three  will  become  12, then  x  four  will  become  six. This  guy,  take  a  look  at  the  second  equation. I  have  my  first  basic  solution. Now,  under  this  first  basic  solution, I  know  that  the  z  equals  to  one. Two  times  zero  plus  one  times zero  they  give  you  zero. You  complete  the  first  table. Now  you'll  try  to  recall the  previous  try  to remember  how  we  actually do  create  this  table. Now,  if  you  look  at  the  original  table  there, not  confusing  at  all,  look  at  this  guy  here. In  these  cases,  this  second  column, The  second  row  actually  corresponding to  the  table,  the  two  rows  there. The  last  one  actually  corresponding to  the  cost  function  coefficient  law. Nothing  special  about  it. I  will  suggest  that  everybody  remember the  way  the  table  I  ow. Remember  the  table  here. Personally,  I  don't  like the  one  previous  shown  on  the  screen  there because  if  you're  not  really clear  about  the  meaning  of the  C  A  and  so  got  so  confused. This  is  actually  much  easier  to  remember. The  first  one  is  always the  list  of  the  variables  in  your  problem. Including  your  original  variable and  the  augmented  one,  the  snack  variable. For  maximization,  you  will  only encounter  the  snack  variables  then because  your  constraint  is always  less  than  equal  to. Now,  the  second  row and  the  third  row  and  g  one corresponding  to  how  many  constraints you  will  have  and how  many  role  you  will  have, that  the  last  row corresponding  to  the core  function  coefficients. The  only  thing  you  need  to  determine is  what  the  value  of  this  guy? Because  at  the  starting  point, you  always  set all  these  original  variables  value to  zero  because  they  are  non  basic. Therefore,  the  the  value  of  z  is  always  zero. This  is  always  like  and  starting  point. Now  I  have  complete  the  first  table. Then  what  I'm  going  to  do.  That's  actually the  big  question  here. Then  what?  So  what  should  I  determine, because  I  need  to  do  I  know  I  need  to  do the  elemental  role  operation  and  on  each  row, and  then  apply  this  kind  of elemental  role  operation  to the  last  row  because  I  need  to keep  changing  the  Z  value. The  Z  value  corresponding  to the  last  entry  hell  in  this  column  there. But  the  big  question  is  that  What  kind  of guidance  I  should  use  to guide  us  to  carry out  the  elementary  row  operation. The  first  one.  The  second  one  is  one, I  should  stop  doing this  elementary  row  operation. These  two  conditions  we basically  is  critical  for  the  synplex  method. Now  first  question  is that  What  kind  of elementary  row  operation  I  should  use. Why  we  need  an  elementary  row  operation? This  is  actually  the fundamental  question  I  need  to  ask. Because  we  are  essentially  jumping  of, we  are  essentially  jumping  among different  so  called  the  basic  solutions. For  each  basic  solutions, some  variables  are  basic, some  variable  are  non  basic. For  the  long  basic  variables, its  value  must  be  zero. That's  what  we  understand  from  the  beginning. That  means  that  whenever  I do  the  elemental  rule  operation, I  need  to  make  some  variable become  non  basic. Need  to  make  some  basic variable  become  non  basic. But  what  is  the  basic  variable? That's  the  thing  you have  to  first  understand. Take  a  look  at  the  table  again. Take  a  look  at  this  table.  Sorry. Why  is  still  here.  Sorry.  I'm  getting. Take  a  look  at  the  table  here. Now,  how  do  I  tell  that? The  variable  is  a  basic. So  variable  is  not. If  you  guys  still  remember, what  is  a  pbard  in  a  matrix? If  I  give  you  a  matrix, and  we  know  that  some  entry  like  a  Pb  entry, all  other  entries  in the  same  column  become  zero. That's  one  basic  criteria  to  allow you  to  decide  among  all  these  variables, which  one  is  basic,  which  one  is  not? In  the  first  table,  you can  immediately  see  that, the  x  three,  this  column has  only  one  entry  is  a  value  one. And  all  other  entries  are  zero. I  will  say  that  all  X three  is  a  basic  variable. Now,  x  four  has  the  same  feature. You  only  have  one  entry  is one  and  the  other  entries  are  all  zero. These  two  guys  are  called  basic  variables because  they  have  a  special  features in  their  column  there. Then  for  other  entries  there, for  other  columns, you  have  a  more  nu  zero  entry  coming  out. They  are  called  non  basic  one. If  I  want  to  make one  non  basic  variable  become  basic, Go  through  the  elementary  role  operation, what  should  I  do? For  example,  if  I  want  to  make  x  one become  a  basic  variable,  what  should  I  do? Well,  first,  I  need  to  know, which  entry  I  want  to  make  it become  a  p  bar.  In  other  words  become  one. The  rest  I  can  just  use animatic  role  operation  to make  it  become  a  zero  now. The  first  question  is  that  which  variable the  first  one  is  that  which variable  or  non  basic. Non  basic  variables  so should  become  a  basic  variable. That's  the  first  question  now,  you  can  ask. Because  I  need  to  keep  changing, changing  this  variable  to  basic, some  ug  basic  become  basic. I  will  maintain  the  total number  of  based  variables unchanged  and  keep  changing this  one  until  it  is  converged. I  have  not  talked  about the  convergence  condition  yet. But  I  know  that my  element  role  operations  purpose is  to  transform  one non  basic  variable  into  basic  one. But  what  is  the  basic  variable? The  column  corresponding  contains only  one  non  zero  entry, whose  value  must  be  one. When  I  elementary  rule  operation, I  don't  change  the  solution of  the  regional  problem  there. In  other  words,  they  are still  satisfying  the  constraint. I  keep  just  finding  different  points, different  basic  solutions, still  satisfying  the  constraint. The  first  question  is,  which  lung basic  variables  I  need  to  choose. To  transform  this  one  into  basic  one. There's  one  criteria,  allow  us  to  choose  int, look  at  the  last  row. If  the  last  row  has  has  a  negative  value. For  example,  I'm  going  to  deal with  this  guy  now,  assuming  that  hole. I'm  just  assuming  that.  You  want to  maximize  the  z  here, I  a  ne  two  negative  one  here. Okay.  You  look  at  the  most  negative  entry, for  example,  this  guy. If  this  one  is  most  negative  one, and  then  the  corresponding  variable, which  originally  is  a  non basic  will  become  the basic  in  the  next  round. In  other  words,  I  will  use  this  criteria  to decide  which  non  basic  variable will  become  a  basic. In  other  words,  in  this  case, or  hypothetically,  if  I want  to  maximize,  for  example, maximize  this  function  here,  I  realize, this  column  has  the  most  negative  coefficient in  my  cost  function. Therefore,  I'm  going  to actually  deal  with  X  one, to  be  my  to  become  a  next  basic  variables. Fine. Now  within  this  column  here, I  still  need  to  ask  my  second  question. Fine.  If  the  x  y  is going  to  be  a  basic  variable, become  a  basic  variable. Now,  which  entry, I  should  make  the  value  become  one. That  will  be  the  second  question  now. Which  entry?  Which  entry in  the  target  column, will  become  value  one  here. That's  the  second  choices. The  second  choice  here  now, how  am  I  supposed  to  deal  with  this  guy? Well,  you  need  to  actually  start  to calculate  the  ratio  between the  b  value  in  each  row, the  b  value  over  the  value  in your  target  non  basic  variable  column. For  example,  12/3  equals  to  four  here, 6/2  equals  to  three  here. I  realize  that  the  ratio, the  second  row  leading  to  a  smaller  ratio. This  one  will  be my  target  entry  to  become  a  value  one. Now,  I  finally  identified which  entry  I  should  work on  in  the  next  iteration  here. The  rest  is  just  the standard  elementary  row  operation. I  mean,  everybody  should  know  now. If  I  want  to  make  this  guy  become  one  here, I  simply  just  use  the  skating  operation. Every  entry  in  this  role  divided  by  two. I  will  essentially  make  this  one  become  one. Now  once  this  one  has  become  one  here, I'm  going  to  use  this  one  to cancel  all  other  entries. Make  them  become  zero. This  is  just  basic  elementic  operational. We're  going  to  try  to  use  example to  illustrate  how  this  one  really  works. Try  to  let  me  try  to  I  mean, the  example  is  the  simplest  way  to  explain. Yeah.  Let's  go  back.  Go  back  to  this  one. Now  you  can  see.  We  start with  this  table  here. This  initial  tap  tablear  there. I  got  two  constrains. I  have  a  four  variables  here, and  the  last  one  is a  coefficient  of  my  cose  function  here. Okay?  Now  I  will  pay  attention  to  this  entry because  this  one  is  eventually my  ***  value  I'm  looking  at. What  I  can  do  is  that  let  me  first  look  at, I  know  that  x3x4, they  are  the  basic  variable because  look  at  the  column. Each  basic  variable  corresponds to  what  I  call  the  pb  column, there's  only  one  entry  is  a  value  one, the  other  entry  is  all  zero. Now  let's  take  a  look  at, if  I'm  going  to  transform this  one  into  another  table, and  which  variable  is supposed  to  become  a  basic  again? I  only  got  two  non  basic  ones. One  of  a  kind  must  become  a  non  basic. Now  I  look  at  the  last  row  here. I  realize,  fine, this  guy  is  the  most  negative  one. I'm  going  to  make  the  x one  become  my  next  basic  one. But  now  if  x  one  become  a  basic  one, now  one  of  the  original  basic  one  must become  a  non  negative,  which  one  should  go? Now  I'm  going  to  calculate a  ratio  of  the  B  over the  entry  under  the so  called  a  basic  variable  to  B  column. 12/3  give  you  four, 6/2  become  a  three  here. Now,  I  say,  this  guy  has  a  smaller  ratio. This  entry  is  supposed  to become  my  pot  entry. Now,  this  one  corresponding to  The  original  one  entries  with  t  four. Therefore,  the  variable  x  four  will  become non  basic  in  the  next  iteration here.  That's  my  target. Now  I'm  going  to  make  this  one make  this  become  one, become  a  pivot  entry, and  then  I  will  make all  other  entries  in the  same  column  to  become  zero. Because  I  want  to  make  x  one become  a  basic  variable  now. I  can  carry  out multiple  elementary  row  operation. Now  you  know  what's  going  on  there. The  first  one,  this  is an  eletic  role  operational. I'm  going  to  scale.  You  multiply one  half  in  front of  every  entry  in  this  role  here. Now  this  guy  become  one. Perfect.  The  next  one, I  need  to  make  this  three and  neg  two  become  zero. What  I  can  do  is  that  I consider  this  one  r  one. The  r  one  subtract  three  times  r  two. I'm  going  to  make  the  s  become  zero,  right? Look  at  this  one  now. Basically,  I'm  going  to  use R  one  subtract  three  times  R  two. That's  what  make  this  entry  become  zero. Of  course,  all  entry  in the  first  row  will  be  updated  accordingly. Then  I'm  going  to  add  twice  of two  to  the  third  row because  the  previous  one,  you  can  see. This  guy  actually  is  negative  two  here  now. The  negative  two  plus  two  times one  give  you  zero. I'm  going  to  add  two, multiply  two  to  the  second  row and  add  to  the  third  row. That's  another  elementary  row  operation. After  all  this  trouble, I  transform  the  original  tablear into  a  new  table  here  now. Now,  in  this  table,  I  realize,  fine, you  can  see  that  in  these  cases, my  X  one  and  X  three  now  become  a  basic. Now  x  two  and  x  f  not  become  a  non  basic. For  non  basic  variables, I  will  simply  set  the  value  equals  zero. Set  x  to  equals  zero, set  x  four  equals  zero, and  then  bring  the  x  one  value. What's  x  one  value? Look  at  the  p  t  entry and  look  at  the  corresponding  constant  term. That  means  x  one  will  take  the  value. X  three  will  take  the  value  of  three  as  well. That's  my  basic  solution  now. Then  you  bring  the  x1x2  value. X1x2  value  because  x  two  now  becomes  zero. I'm  going  to  take  I think  the  x  two  becomes  zero  now. Bring  the  x1x2  value back  into  my  original  cose  function. I  realize  that  my  outcome  is  negative  six. The  reason  I  write  here  because the  table  actually distinguish  minimization  maximization. If  you  use  the  magimization, you  will  directly  read  here. If  you  do  the  minimization, you  have  to  put a  negative  sign  net  one  in  front. But  that's  why  in  the  course, we  will  only  focus  on  the  meganmization, because  then  you  can  directly read  your  cs  function  value  here. Otherwise,  you  have  to  put a  negative  one  in  front. That's  okay  That's  actually explain  how this  synplex  method  really  operate. You  started  with  one  basic  solution. Then  you  use  the  elementary  rule  operation to  derive  another  basic  solution  here  by changing  one  of the  originally  long  basic  variable to  a  basic  variable  and one  original  basic  variable  back  into non  basic  variable  back into  the  non  basic  variable. Along  this  way,  the  cost  function  value will  change  because x  value  change  because  x  corresponding to  the  basic  variable  numbers  variable. Now  the  question  is that  what  does  it  look  like? In  terms  of  this  solution  in the  original  physical  region. Try  to  take  a  look  at, I  think  that  if  you  let me  just  try  to  draw  a  graph. Then  you  will  see.  Let  me try  to  draw  a  graph  here, otherwise,  Use  a  graph and  you  see  what's  going  on  there,  right? The  original  problem  is  try to  minimize  z  equals two  negative  two  x  one  minus  x  two  here, you're  subject  to  three x  one  plus  four  x  two, less  than  equal  to  12, and  two  x  one  plus  two, less  than  equal  to  six. That's  the  original  problem  there. If  I'm  going  to  actually  use a  graphic  way  to  solve it,  What  does  it  look  like? But  this  is  x  one,  is  x  two here.  Now  you  can  see. My  first  this  is  zero  and  try  to  find hole  12  no,  I  actually  get  bigger. I  think  one,  two, three,  four,  five,  six. One,  two,  three,  four, five,  six,  getting  bigger. It's  easy  for  me  to  look,  one,  two, three,  four,  five,  six. That's  x  two  here.  Now  I  have, of  course,  x  one, x  to  the  non  negative  low. For  the  first  constrain, if  you  set  x  one  equals  zero, your  x  two  equal  to  three  here, this  guy,  three  here. If  you  set  x  equals  zero, x1y  equal  four  here. You  basically  have  like  this  one  here. That's  three  x  one plus  four  x  two  equals  to  12. I  know  that  this  side  is  a  physical  regional. Then  for  the  second  one, if  x  one  equal  to  zero, x  two  equal  to  six,  this  guy. If  x  equals  zero, x  equals  three  here, basically  I  have  a This  one  here.  But  that's  two x  one  plus  x  two  equals  to  six. This  side  is  a  pasible  region. I  have  find  this  guy  here  now. Anything  inside  of  this  one is  my  pasile  region  here  now. What  is  grading  of  my  cost  function  there? The  grading  actually  is  a  net two  and  negative  one. Net  two  negative  one  here  now. Basically  is  one  and  two, negative  two,  this  is  a  negative  two,  x  one. The  gradient  basically  is  a negative  two,  negative  one  here. This  is  actually  a  negative  one  here. Basically  you  are  essentially  this  guy. You  go  this  way.  Go  this way  and  actually  you  extend  it. This  is  basically  the  gradient, going  downward. That  means  if  you actually  getting  closer  and closer  to  this  point, going  this  direction,  you are  essentially  increasing. Increasing  the  function  value. Try  to  minimize  it,  you have  to  go  the  other  way  around, go  the  other  way  around. That  means  that  basically, this  is  a  so  called  benefit  line D.  You  want  to  slide  this  one  up and  down  and  you realize  that  this  one is  supposed  to  be  my  best  solution. Now  look  at  how the  syplex  method  really  works. Initially,  I  starting  from  here, because  x1x2  becomes  zero. Now,  what  happened  to  the  second  solution? At  what's  the  second  solution  here? Look  at  what's  the  second  solution here.  The  second. I,  I  can  just  use one  screen  use  the  middle  screen  there. The  second  solution  says that  the  x  y  equals  to  one. X  y  equals  to  three  x  two  equal  to  one. Here  in  this  table,  I  know that  x  y  is  a  basic  variable  now. X  three  is  a  basic  variable. X  two  is  a  non  basic  because  you  have a  more  entry  is  ng  zero. Therefore,  in  this  solution, I  have  x  one  is  three,  X  two  is  zero. I  don't  care  about  the  f  because  they are  just  snack  variable. In  a  graphic  method,  I  don't  care  them. That  means  the  second  solution  I got  is  nothing  but  a  zero  is  here. I  starting  from  here, I  end  with  this  one. I  actually  jump  from one  vertex  to  another  vertex. This  is  a  cool  part  of  the  syplex  method, and  if  you  follow  the  same  procedure, you  can  anticipate the  next  one  will  be  this  guy. Of  course,  Natural  you  can  ask  me, is  it  always  going  counterclockwise or  clockwise?  Nobody  knows. But  why  I  always  choose  the  column  with the  most  negative  value  in  the  last  row. Because  I  need  to  make  sure that  one  traverses the  vertex  is  always  moving  in  one  direction. Because  otherwise,  I  may actually  back  force  back  force. For  example,  if  I  randomly  choose entry  or  columns  to become  a  next  basic  variables. I  may  actually  first  jump  from  here, then  coming  next  iteration, I  will  go  back  to  this  one  again. You  will  never  converge. You  set  a  criteria. I'm  always  looking  for  the  column with  the  most  negative  one. Therefore,  when  I  operate, I  will  always  jump  from  one  vertex  to another  and  the  clockwise or  counter  clockwise, always  in  one  direction  move. Okay,  you  will  never  never  jump  back. But  whether  this  direction  give  you the  quickest  shortest  path to  the  best  solution? No,  I  B. They  only  guarantee  that you  move  in  one  direction, but  they  never  tell  you  this  is the  shortest  a  pass  to  go  there. If  you  say  that,  I  don't use  the  most  negative  one. I  use  the  least  negative  one.  Can  I  do  that? At  least  negative?  Yes,  you  can.  You  can. But  you  may  actually if  original  wise  count  clockwise, and  if  you  choose  a  least  negative, you  may  actually  go  to  clockwise. That's  the  only  difference. But  in  whatever  cases, make  sure  you  stick  to  one  rule. Stick  to  the  list  most negative  one  or  you stick  to  the  list  negative  one. Nobody  tell  you  that  this  is  wrong. In  the  exam,  it  is  not  necessary, you  always  choose  the  most  negative  one. But  as  long  as  you  consistent,  every  step, you  make  the  same  criteria, then  you  will  eventually will  find  a  solution. This  is  actually  I  want  to  emphasize  the. Before  I  finish  this  one, I  want  you  to  go  back and  to  think  about  this  two  table  again, why  the  minimization  and  this  whole  table. Be  careful,  no,  I  want  you  to take  a  look  at  this  whole  table, and  you  think  about  it. Why  do  you  want  to distinguish  these  two  tables? Minimization  maximization, I  need  to  write  in  this  manner. For  minimization,  I  need  to  write the  c  transpose  minus  c  zero  transpose a  da  but  for  maximization, I  need  to  write  the  negative  c transpose  plus  zero  A. Sorry,  that  one.  It's  always just  to  forget  about  the  trans  things. I  will  ask  every  one  of  you  guys  to  go back  and  look  at  these  two  slides. And  you  try  to  figure  out why  I  need  to  set  in  this  manner. Although  in  this  course,  in  my  part, I  always  recommend  students  sick  to the  maximization,  easy  to  remember. But  in  case  you direct  deal  with  the  minimization, why  I  should  choose using  positive  C  transpose  minus  something. I  put  a  big  question. You  think  about  it  at  home. Come  back  next  week. Then  to  me? Because  this  one  is  critical  for  the  section. Let  me  talk  about  the  robustness of  your  simplex  method. You  think  about  it.  All  right. That's  the  end  of  today's  lecture. Thank  you  very  much.
