If  time  allowed,  then  we also  mention  a  few  new  algorithms, dealing  with  LP,  then  we  may start  to  introduce some  linear  programming  problem. Let's  start  to  do some  exercise  together  along  this  way. We're  going  to  actually  clarify certain  issues  related to  your  different  algorithms. Et's  start  with  a  very  simple  problem. We  deal  with  a  maximization. We  try  to  maximize this  function  five  x  one  plus  77x2, and  then  theta  the  constrains. So  in  the  In  a  quiz, I  may  not  actually  write  in  this  matter, I  may  use  the  duality  things  to  write. Then  you  can  actually  have  more  variables. But  you  know  that  if you're  going  to  use  a  duality, transform  this  into  another  form, do  problem,  you  have a  few  number  of  variables, then  you  can  use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  it. Whenever  it  is  a  graphic  way  it's  easier. Let's  try  to  solve  this  one. First  of  all,  you  have  The  constants, then  you  have,  of  course, these  are  the  actual  one it's  always  by  default,  you  have  it. How  do  you  deal  with  that? In  the  exam,  you to  go  through  exact  the  same  procedure. You  have  to  use  a  ruler  to  work  out, I'm  going  to  just  put  it  in  the  middle  of. I  hope  that  you  can  see  be  too  dark. I  don't  know  why  some  very  dark. Let's  first  draw  the  coordinates. You  know  that  actually  the  maximum x  two  is  about  six, six  there,  and  the  X  one, the  maximum  about  12. You  can  roughly  estimate. We  can  use  the  ruler  glasses.  See  probably. Okay.  So  basically,  you  guys  just  repeat what  I  do  in  the  quiz  or  in  the  exam,  right? Now  you  know,  X  one  actually could  have  a  max  range  of  12, so  you  chose  you  know, choose  a  proper,  Okay. Here  you  go,  then  your  y or  x  two  is  about  six. We  have  a  bit  here. One,  two,  three,  four, five,  six,  seven,  four, this  is  x  one,  and  this  is  x  two  here. Then  the  first  construing  is four  x  one  plus  five  x  two,  no  more  than  20. The  boundary  would  be  four  x one  plus  five  x  two  equals  to  20, one  x  one  equals  zero,  x  equal  to  four, one,  two,  three,  four  and  five, six,  and  two,  four, six,  eight,  ten,  and  12. One  x  one  equal  zero,  five, x  two  equals  four, one  x  two  equal  to  zero, and  x  one  equal  five. Basically  this  is  actually  the  first. That's  the  first  constrain. You  can  say,  four  x  one  plus five  x  two  equals  to  20. That's  the  first  constrain  there. Then  the  second  one  is  two  x  one plus  six  x  two,  lower  than  24. O  x  one  equals  zero, x  equals  to  four  as  well and  then  x  two  equals  zero, x  one  equal  12. Now  you  got  the  here. Here  you  go.  Here  you  go  two  x  one plus  six  x  two  equals  to  24. Of  course,  for  the  first  one and  because  it's  less  than  equal  to. Therefore,  you  should  go  this  side. Similarly,  for  this  constraint is  also  go  inside. Toward  the  11  side is  actually  the  physical  region. Then  the  last  one,  six  x  one  plus four  x  two  equals  to  16. X  one  equal  to  zero,  x  equal  to  four. Then  x  two  equal  to  zero  and x  one  equals  to  8/3. 8/3  that's two  times  two  quarter,  L  like  this  one. All  right.  So  look  like  here.  Right. Okay. Look  like  a  here,  so  it's  all  here. That's  why  it's  about  six x  one  plus  four  x  two, four  x  two  and  equals  to  16. Again,  this  one  is the  pasial  region  direction  there. Then  you  know  X  two  is  smaller than  zero  and  X  one  is  smaller. Now  you  know  that this  is  actually  the  region. It's  pasible  now. You  can  take  an  intersection  of, Now  what  we  do  is  that  you  need  to determine  the  gradient  of  the  cose  function. The  gradient  of  the  cose function  basically  is just  the  coefficient  of  the  function. You  have  a  52,  57,  that's  basically. In  other  words,  the  gradient  of the  function  basically  equals to  five  and  seven,  is  a  factor. The  point  to  the  direction  there. That  means  x  y  to  five  x  two  to seven  x  y  is  a  five  here, and  x  two  is  a  seven. So  five  and  seven, x  y  is  of  five  is  here, x  is  seven  here. Then  you  have  about the  gradient  of  the  cost  function  there. That's  give  you  the  grade  of  the  57. Then  you  start  to  the so  called  the  value  line. Basically  this  for  example, is  the  value  line  there. Now  because  you  want  to  maximize, you  know  that  you're  supposed  to  move along  along  this  direction, give  you  the  increase  of  the  cost  of  values. But  then  you  have  to  make  sure  that this  value  line  has  to intersect  with  the  physical  region. Therefore,  when  you  start  to  slide down  and  you  can  easily  see that  actually  the  04  is  the  first  point. You  touch  on  the  vue  line and  also  contained  in your  physical  region  there. Therefore,  in  your  exam, you  got  to  actually  directly  show  me. This  actually  the  line  you  find. This  is  basically  eat  the  value  line, and  then  this  east  point, then  the  first  touched  by  the  value  line, but  still  contained  inside the  physical  region  there. This  one  give  you  the  zero  and  full. That  basically  use  a  graphic  way to  find  mo  solution  of  this  problem. In  these  cases,  you  know  that your  mo  solution  x  one  star  equals  to  zero, and  x  two  star  equals  to  four. Therefore,  your  best  function  value F  x  one  star  and  x two  star  equals  to five  times  x  one  star plus  seven  times  x  two  star. That's  give  you  five  times zero  plus  seven  times  four,  give  you  28. So  now  you  have  the  final  results. Make  sure  that  you  write  in  this  manner. I  want  to  see  in this  picture  and all  these  two  boundary  lines. Each  one  correspond  to one  const.  I'm  going  to  count. I'm  going  to  count  how  many  lines  you  have. How  many  contion  you have  then  how  many  line  you  have. I  want  to  see  the  gradient  direction there  and  also  the  value  line. Then  you  have  to  point  out  the  value  line intersect  with  the  physical region  at  the  first  point, where  that's  the  open  value  coming  from. That's  the  graphic  method  now. If  I  somehow  not  writing  in  this  manner. But  the  rather,  I'm  going  to  actually  use the  so  called  duality,  way  of  writing  it. You  know  that  actually, The  original  A  you  want  to  do max  five  x  one  plus  seven  x  two, and  then  you  subject two  or  the  three  constraints, the  so  called  four  x  one  plus five  x  two  and  no  more  than  20. Then  you  have  two  x  one  plus six  x  two,  no  more  than  24, and  then  you  have  six  x  one plus  four  x  two  and  no  more  than  16, and  then  x  one  and  x  two  is  non  negative. Then  I  may  actually write  in  a  different  manner  because  from  here you  know  that  you  basically  have a  max  of  z  equals  two, you  write  like  five  and  seven. And  times  your  x. X  is  x1x2. This  one  basically  c  transpose. Then  you  have  subject  two. So  called  A  now.  What  is  the  A  here? You're  going  to  write  like  a four  and  five,  two, and  six  and  six  and  four x  and  then  no  more  than  the  B, I  will  ride  in  this  manner  now. 2024,  16,  now  equals  to  b  here, and  then  you  have  x1x2  bigger  than  zero. So  In  a  quiz  or  exam, I  may  actually  use  this  du  form. I'm  actually  going  to  write  like  a  Ming. I'm  going  to  write  like  a  Ming your  z  equals  two, B  transpose  and  times  W.  In  this  cases, you  have  so  called  20,  24, 16  and  times  W  one  and  and  what? And  what? What  is  how  many  variable? You  got  w123,  That's  W, and  then  you  have the  subject  subject  to  what? A  transpose  W  and  no  more  than  C  here. Then  you  have  a  W  one  and  W  two. I  may  actually  write  in  this  manner. If  I  write  this  manner  then,  you  know, you're  not  going  to  use  graphic  way to  do  it.  You  cannot  do. But  you  have  to  use  a  simplex  method. But  if  I  question  ask  you  to  use a  graphic  way  to  solve  it, and  basically,  I  would  suggest that  you  have  to  transform  the  problem. If  I  strongly  ask  you  to  request you  to  use  a  graphic way  to  solve  this  problem, you  is  more  than  two  variables. I  cannot  directly  use  a  graphic  way  to  do  it. However,  since  I'm  asked, then  I  have  to  use  the  duality  theory. To  transform  this  one  into  d  problem, and  the  dual  problem  will  have a  fewer  number  of  variables. Then  I  can  use  the  graphic  way  to  solve  it. You  need  to  know  one,  you  should consider  the  duality  theory. Just  be  sensitive  to  the  question. The  question  ask  you  to  use  a  graphic  way, then  they  must  be  able to  use  a  graphic  way  to  do  it. Just  find  a  way  to  transform  the  problem. This  is  actually  the  graphic  graphic  method typically  is  very  simple,  but  very  powerful. If  for  example,  I  ask  you  In  these  questions, find  all  the  integer  integer  solutions. If  x1x2  are  all  integer  values, not  real  value  anymore. But  how  do  you  base  on  this  picture? How  do  you  find  the  best  solution? If  this  x1x2  now  is  not  a  real  value. Now  the  picture  is  already  here. You  think  about,  of  course, you  know  the  solution  04 is  is  a  integral  solution. But  in  cases  not,  then  what  are  going  to  do? Well,  In  this  cases, you  basically  just  create  a  grade. You  create  a  grade  here. And  basically  you  create  a  grade, you'll  find all  this  integer  intersection  there. It's  very  straightforward. Then  you  can  say,  Okay,  fine, I'm  going  to  do  this  one  now. Here  you  go.  And  here  you  go. Then  you  can  roughly  say,  well, I  have  one,  two,  three, four,  five, six,  and possibly  some  point  here,  maybe  it's  not. This  is  actually  this  is  the  point  here, but  it's  probably  not  on  the  line. Because  one,  two,  12  is  not  on  this  line. Therefore,  this  one  is  supposed  to  be  inside, and  you  have  one  here. Then  you  do  the  same  thing.  You  are still  sliding  down  this  guy. But  until  you  touch  the  first  integer  values. That  is  the  o,  the  best  solutions  there. The  graphic  method  can use  to  solve  integer  programming. When  you  have  a  few  number  of  ds  variables. Just  be  careful  now. Later  on,  I  may  ask  you  to  solve  a  problem, for  example,  to  find the  number  of  product  you  have  to  produce. You  know  the  number  product  that has  to  be  integer  value. Therefore,  you  are  essential  to  try  to  find the  integra  value  if  you use  a  graphic  way  to  solve  it, and  you  know  how  to  approach  it.  Okay. That's  the  first  problem. But  this  one  actually  shows  a  lot. First  of  all,  I  could use  mean  to  keep  the  problem, and  then  you  know that  you've  got  three  variables, it's  not  suitable  for  user  graphical  method. If  the  question  still  ask you  to  use  a  graphic  method, then  you  know  that  you essentially  need  to  transform this  one  into  a  standard  form that  is  applicable  to  the  graphical  method. That  basically  means  you  have  to  use the  duality  things  to reduce  the  number  of  variables. The  second  one  is  that  in  case  I'm asking  you  to  solve  integer  solutions. Still  use  a  graphic  way, and  then  you  know  how  to  do  it. In  the  past,  the  student  just  enumerate. Whenever  you  enumerate,  I  will  give  you zero  marks  because  you  have  no  idea. How  do  you  use  a  graphic  way  to solve  it?  Yes,  you  can  find  the  solution. But  this  is  not  what  I  want. If  you  use  a  graphic  way  to  solve integer  programming  problem,  don't  enumerate. You  have  to  clearly  show  me  that  you  are touching  the  best  integer  solutions. That's  the  one. Then  I'm  going  to  ask  you  if  I'm  going  to use  simplex  method  to  solve  this  problem. If  I'm  going  to  use  a  simplex method  to  solve  this  problem, then  I  want  to  see  later on  you  still  use  this  picture. I  will  see  how  the  solution start  to  move  around. Age,  on  the  vertices. Actually,  from  this  picture, you  know  that,  you  have  vertices. One  of  the  guide  must be  the  optimal  solution. You  also  know  that  if  you're  going to  use  simplex  method, If  the  direction  is  correct, one  iteration  should  finish. But  if  a  direction  is  not  good  enough, maximum  two  iteration  should  finish. Because  the  simplex  method  is always  jump  from  t  two  verdict. Let's  try.  We're  going  to  try  to  use a  simplex  method  to  see  it's  true  or  not. Now,  it's  still  the  same  problem. I'm  going  to  max  five x  one  can  see  it  all  plus  seven  x  two, and  then  subject  to four  x  one  plus  five  x  two, no  more  than  20,  two  x  one  plus  six  x  two, no  more  than  24,  six  x  one plus  four  x  two,  no  more  than  16, and  x  one  and  x  two  has  to  be  because I'm  using  maximization  because all  contra  less  than  equal  two. Now  you  know  that I  don't  have  the so  called  artificial  variables. I  also  don't  have  a  surplus  variable. As  long  as  you  don't  have artificial  variables  there, and  then  you  know  that  you're not  going  to  introduce  the  big, the  penalty  term  there.  That's  good. Now  I'm  going  to  first  tf. I  use  a  simplest  method, the  first  one  need  to transform  into  a  standard  form. You  need  to  transform all  this  inequality  into equality  by  introducing  slack  variables. You  have  a  max  of  z equals  to  five  x  one  plus  seven  x  two. Now,  subject  24x1  plus  five  x two  plus  x  three  equals  to  20. Then  two  x  one  plus  six  x two  plus  x  four  equals  to 24  and  six  x  one  plus four  x  two  plus  x  five  equals  to  16. I  don't  need  to  actually deal  with  these  two  gas. I  have  the  three  snack  variables. You  know  that  our  ital  guess, the  first  basic  solution  is  what  is basically  is  00  and  x  equal  to  20, x  four  equal  to  24,  and  x  516. This  is  actually  my  first basic  solution  there. I  was  set  x1x2, they  are  all  to  become  lung  basic  variables, just  assign  the  zero  to  them. That's  my  first  fact. Whatever  you  have  this  problem  there, in  terms  of  this  standard  form, you  can  immediately  write down  the  first  basic  solution. You  can  see  how  this  basic solution  corresponding  to  what? This  is  actually  x  one  here, x  two,  x  three, four,  and  x  five. You  are  essentially  starting  from  this  point. Starting  from  the  original  them. That's  your  starting  point  now. Now,  I'm  going  to  write everything  into  the  first  tabular, the  simplex  tabular  them. So  you  first  need to  transform  this  cost  function  into another  form  z  minus four  x  one  minus  seven  x  two  equals  zero. The  left  hand  side  is the  coefficient  we  need  to  record. The  right  hand  side  is  the  constant. In  your  in  your  table, you  first  write  down the  first  row  write down  the  variable  you  deal  with. You  have  x  one,  x  two, x  three,  x  four, and  x  five,  and  then  you  have  a  B  here. You  have  a  B  here,  and you  have  to  use a  vertical  line  to  separate  them. Then  each  row  we are  corresponding  to  one  constituent. You  have  a  three  construent  there, you  have  a  three  row  there. But  you  have  one  more  equation, is  a  co  function  cost. You  write  down  the  last  one  here. Then  of  course,  some  people  prefer  to record  or  to  remember  the  basic  variables. Let's  just  write  down  the  coefficient  first. For  the  first  one,  you  have a  five  because  the  coefficient  of  x  is  five, and  then  the  cofient  of  x  is  one  here. But  there's  no  x4x5, so  you  put  a  zero  and  zero, and  that  the  b  value  is  20  here. You  record  the  first  row. Then  for  the  second  row, you  have  two,  then  six, and  then  there's  no  x. You  put  a  zero  here,  x four  coefficient  is  one  here. There's  no  x  five  to  zero, you  put  24  here. Then  for  the  third  one,  you have  64001  and  16. Then  for  the  bottom  one  here, and  you  can  forget  about  the  z. You  don't  care  about  the  z  here. What  you  really  record  is the  coefficient  of  the  x  variable  them. You  have  negative  five,  negative  seven. There's  no  x3xf  x  five  in  the  cose  function, so  you  put  zero,  zero, zero,  and  the  right  hand  side  is  zero  here, you  have  a  zero  here. Then  you  have  the  first  tabular. Some  people  actually  prefer  to  put the  basic  variable  on the  left  most  column  there. What  are  the  basic  variables? You  have  to  take  a  look  at  every  column  here. Take  a  look  at  every  column, and  whenever  some  columns contains  only  one  entry  with  a  value  one, or  other  entries  zero, and  that  column  is  called  a  pvvert  column, and  the  corresponding  variable is  a  basic  variable. The  basic  variable  will  carry the  value  appearing  on  the  right  most  column. For  example,  X  three is  one  here  correspond  to  20, so  the  20  value  will  be  assigned  to  x  three. Now,  X  four,  the  pt  entry  is  one  here, is  corresponding  the  constant  term  is  24, 24  assigned  to  x  four, and  then  x  five, this  is  the  p  bt  entry, the  corresponding  constant  term  16, 16  assigned  to  x  five.  That's  how  you  read. Therefore,  people  actually  would  like  to write  X  three  and  x four  and  x  five.  They  just  put  here. But  not  everybody  would like  to  write  this  one. I  exam  if  you  say, I  don't  care  about  specifically write  down  the  basic  variable. But  from  the  matrix,  I  can clearly  see  what  is  the  basic  variable? I'm  fine  with  that.  I'm  fine  with  that. In  other  words,  it  is not  necessary  to  write  this. But  the  standard  way  people  always use  this  one  to  remember. Because  you  know  that  actually  which variable  not  appearing  here will  be  called  a  non  basic  variable. In  the  next  iteration, one  of  the  basic  variable  will  be replaced  by  the  previous  lung  based  variable. That's  how  the  iteration  really  works. Now,  let's  see,  we  started  iteration  now. You  already  have  the  first  table. In  the  simplex  semester, you  already  have  some  points. When  I  see  this  table,  when  I see  all  the  numbers  properly  put  in, then  you  will  get  some  points. Now  let's  start  to  iterate.  Here. Based  on  the  so called  the  most  negative  rule. You  take  a  always  take a  look  at  the  last  role  here. You  check  all  those  coefficient  entries. If  either  one  of the  guys  actually  appear  negative, then  you  know  the  optimization is  not  finished  yet. You're  going  to  continue to  do  the  optimization. Now  the  question  is  that  among those  negative  values, which  basically corresponding  to  the  variable, which  most  likely  is not  most  likely  they must  be  a  long  basic  one. You  want  to  make  this one  become  non  negative. That  means  your  goal  is  to make  the  corresponding  variable  to  be  basic. But  you  have  two  options. Now  which  one  I  should  choose? In  other  words,  which  variable  here, I  should  make  it  basic  in  the  next  iteration. The  common  rule  is  that  I'm  going  to choose  the  most  negative  one. In  other  words,  this  guy. I'm  going  to  actually  choose this  column  to  be  processed. That  means  I  intentions  to  make  x two  to  be  my  next  basic  variable. But  if  the  x  two  is going  to  become  a  basic  variable, then  among  x3x  fx4x  i, one  of  the  guy  will  become  non  basic. Which  one  should  go?  I  need  to  decide. In  this  cases,  I'm  going  to  calculate the  ratio  of  the  B  entries, entries  in  this  x  two  column. For  example,  20/5  equals  to  four. Then  24/6  equals  to  four. The  16/4  equals  to four.  There  are  all  four  there. It's  just  a  random  pick  one. You  random  pick  one. Typically,  you  choose  one  small. Yeah,  choose  one  small  does't  matter. I  choose  this  one, you  chose  one  that's  no  issue  there. But  you  have  to  remember  why you  choose  a  ratio  of  the  smallest  ratio. Because  recall  that  when  I  say  this  one, you  choose  the  ratio  smallest  one. Then  when  you  carried  out the  elementary  rule  operation. You  know  the  b  column  value will  always  be  non  negative. No  matter  you  subtract  whatever  you  do. This  is  actually  the  motivation. Now  let's  see.  We're  going to  choose  this  one. That  means  that  basically  this  will  be the  entry  to  become  a  value  one. And  all  other  entry  value  will  be go,  will  be  removed. Now  let's  do  the  iteration  here  now. First  of  all,  I  want  to  I'm  going  to  copy. I  think  the  simple  very  dious  thing is  that  there's  a  lot  of  writing  there, but  you  have  to  be  patient. I'm  going  to  copy  the  table  now. You  have  x  one,  x  two, x  three,  x  four, x  five,  and  the  B  here. I'm  going  to  first  write down  the  row  three  here  because  I'm  going to  actually  make  this  one  a I'm  going  to  make  this  one  become  one  first. But  that  basically  means that  I'm  going  to  use  this  one  called  R  one, R  two,  R  three  and  R  foll. Row  one,  row  two  row  row  fall. I'm  going  to  use  R  three  replaced  by  R  3/4. In  other  words,  I'm  going to  scale  down  R  three, every  entry  divided  by  four. Then  this  become  one  now, and  this  one  become  a  6/4  equal  to  3/2,  1.5. Then  this  one  is  still  zero  and  zero  and then  1/4  and  this  one  become  four  now. So  far  so  good.  Then  what? Now  this  is  become  a  new  R  three. Then  I'm  going  to  use  the  new R  three  start  to  operate, use  elemental  role  operation  to  make these  three  guys  p  zero. Remember,  now  this  has  become a  new  R  three  now. I'm  going  to  right  here.  Don't  get  confused. Now  to  make  this  one  become  a  zero, I'm  going  to  use  r  one  replaced by  r  one  subtract  five  of  r  s. Minus  five  times  R. Now  you  can  see  f  four  min  five  times  1.5. Five  times  1.5  is  a  7.5. Four  -7.5  is  negative  3.5,  am  I  right? True.  Everybody  should  follow  me. 15/2,  now  four  -15/2, let's  give  you  negative 7/2  that  give  negative  3.5. Then  this  one  becomes zero  because  of  five  minus  five  times  10. Then  one  minus  five  times  zero  still  one, zero  minus  five  times  zero  still  zero  and zero  minus  five  times  1/4. You  have  negative  5/4. Okay.  Then  what  happened? 20  minus  five  times  four  give  you  zero. You  finish  the  first  row  transformation. Then  you  deal  with  the  second  one, you  make  this  guy  become  zero, now  you  have  R  two  replaced  by  r  two, subtract  six  times  r  three. Now  two  minus  six times  3/2,  that  give  you  one. Two  minus  line.  Negative  seven.  Seven. Because  the  six  times  du  give you  18/2  g  nine. Two  minus  nine  g  negative  seven. Fine.  Six  minus  six  times  one  give  you  zero, zero  minus  six  times  zero  s  zero, one  minus  six  times  01, and  the  zero  minus  six  time di  They  gave  you  negative  3/2. Then  this  one  give  you  zero. 24  minus  six  times  four,  give  you  zero. So  far  so  good.  Now  I'm going  to  deal  with  one  last  term  here. R  four.  Now  I'm  going  to use  because  this  one  is  next  is  seven. I'm  going  to  use  R  four  replace  by R  four  plus  seven  times  r  three. Now  let's  see  six  plus, be  careful  now,  six  plus  seven times  R  four,  or  R  three. R  three  is  this  guy,  3/2. Seven  times  3/2  is  what  is  what? Seven  times  21/2,  10.5,  right? So  so  No,  no, no,  this  negative  five  hole. Sorry,  it's  a  five,  not  seven  hole. Seven.  Yes,  right.  I'm  going  to actually  multiply  seven  here, seven  times  this  one  and eight  to  the  last  row. Seven  times  1.5,  give  you  10.5, 10.58  25,  give  you  positive  five  p  five. 5.5. Okay.  Then  one  times  one times  I  give  you  78  minus  seven, give  you  zero,  five. And  then  okay,  zero times  78,  this  one  still  zero, zero  times  78,  this  one  still  zero, zero,  no,  one  time seven  gives  you  78  dis  guy  to  seven. Then  you  have  four  times  7288  to  disc  28  in. Right.  So  now  you  finish  the  first  iteration. Now  you  take  a  look  at those  kind  of  a  variable  there. You  realize  that  now  the  X  two, X  and  X  four  now  become  a  basic  variable. Because  the  corresponding  column  here. Because  the  corresponding  column  here, they  are  all  now  contains  to  here. The  only  contains  only  one  entry with  a  value  one  here. X  and  x  two, x  and  x  four. The  basic  variable  scheme. Now  the  x  one  and  x  five become  non  basic  variables. Therefore,  I'm  going  to  directly  assign the  value  of  x  one  equals  zero, and  x  five  equals  zero. Because  they  are  non  basic  variables. I  the  set  them  value  equal  zero. But  then  the  x  two, I'm  going  to  go  for  the  four  here  now because  you  go  to  the  pit  entry, then  horizontally,  you'll  find  four  value. Therefore  x  two  equals  to  four. Then  the  x  three  go to  o  x  equal  to  zero  here, and  similarly,  x  four  is  also  go  to  zero, x  four  equals  zero. Now  you  have  another  physical  solution. And  then  you  check  whether this  solution  is  optimal  or  not. You  first  find  the  feasible  solution. R  on  this  guy. Then  you  decide  whether  this  one is  feasible  or  is  optimal  or  not. You  take  a  look  at  basically  this  roller. In  this  role  here,  you  find, every  entry  now  is  nondtive. That  basically  means  that  you cannot  improve the  cos  function  value  further. You  cannot  improve  the  cos  fun,  the  z  value. You  cannot  improve  the  z  value  further, by  using  the  eletic  role  operation  there. Then  you  stop  here. You  stop  here,  and  you  know  that  actually the  optimal  solution  would be  x  y  equal  to  zero. And  x  two  equal  to  four, then  the  optimal  value of  the  course  function  is  28. That's  actually  perfectly  match  here. Perfectly  match  what  we  got in  a  graphic  method. Now  you  take  a  look  at I  initially  start  from  here, and  then  after  one  step, I  actually  go  here  now. I  jump  to  another  vertex, which  happened  to  be  the  best. If  I  choose  not  most  negative  term. But  rather  I'm  going  to choose  the  least  negative  term. I  can  choose  this  one.  Now  we will  see  what's  going  on  there. I  don't  know  what's  going  on.  Let's  try. Then  this  one  perhaps  will  help  you to  understand  how  the  purpose  of  the  rules. Let's  try.  I'm  going  to  still  use  the  table. I'm  still  start  with  the  same  table. But  the  only  difference  is that  instead  of  choosing  this  guy. I'm  going  to  choose  the  negative  one, but  it  has  to  be  negative. Has  to  be  negative. Then  I'm  going  to  still use  the  smallest  ratio  one. This  one  I  cannot  change. I  cannot  change.  Because  I  need  to  make sure  that  my  B  part has  to  be  all  non  negative. Now  I'm  going  to  carried out  the  element  role  operation. X  one,  X  two,  X  three, x  four,  and  x  five, and  then  I'm  going  to  have  a  B  here. I'm  first  I'm  going to  still  choose  same  roller. That  means  that  this  guy  basically will  will  become  my  pb  trill. X  one  will  become  a  basic  variable. I'm  going  to  still  have  a  one  row two  row  three  row  and  four. I  have  R  one, R  two,  R  three  and  R  four  here. Now,  this  R  three, x  one  part  will  become  one. In  other  words,  I  was  going  to  use  R  three replaced  by  1/6  r  three. I'm  going  to  basically  just  use  scaing. Now  you  have  1  2/3,  zero,  01/6. Oh,  sorry.  Actually  if  this  one, the  ratio  will  be  completely  changed. In  this  case,  you're  not really  easily  choose  this  one,  not  sure. I  have  to  redo  it.  Now  I have  to  redo  this  guy  now. The  ratio,  I  will  re  right  here. You  have  the  first  one  here, 20/4  give  you  five. The  second  one  is  a  24/2.  Give  you  12. The  s  one  is  16/6. That's  why  actually  is  good. 8/3.  It  is  actually  smallest  one. In  other  words,  this  is  indeed, the  only  option  formula.  Fine.  That's  good. Now  I  have  8/3. Then  I  need  to  make  all  these  two  guys  to go  to  become  a  zero by  using  elemental  rule  operation. For  the  r  one  here, I'm  going  to  use  r one  minus  four  times  r  three. Four  minus  four  times  one  give  you  zero. Five  minus  four  times  the  sky. Five  -8/3.  Let's  give  you  7/3. Everybody  follow  me. Help  me  to  check. Then  one  minus  four  times  zero, still  one  and  zero minus  four  times  zero,  still  zero, and  then  zero  minus  four  times  1/6, they  give  you  negative  2/3. Then  20  minus  four  times  8/3. That  means  20  minus  two, 20  -2/3,  That's  give  you sit  that's  basically  28  or  28/3,  28/3  there. Then  for  the  second  one, I'm  going  to  actually  use  r two  minus  two  r  three. Twice  of  the  r3d. Two  minus  two  times  one, give  you  zero,  six  minus  two  time  disgui. That  means  six  -4/3, 18  minus  four,  g  14/3. Zero  minus  two  times  zero,  still  zero. One  minus  two  times  zero  still  one. Zero  minus  two  time disguise,  negative  one  third. Now  you  have  a  24  minus  two  times  8/3. That  give  you  basically 72  -16.  That's  give  you  56. I  think  is  a  56.  You  help  me  to  check. 65616,  56,  give  you  72,  72/24. The  last  one.  The  last  one  here. Basically  this  one certainly  becomes  zero  now, basically  is  the  R four  plus  five  times  R  three. Now  netive  five  plus  one times  five  give  you  zero, neg  seven  plus  five  times dig  negive  seven  plus  five  time  disc  10/3. Let's  give  you  one.  Negative  one, negative  11/3,  am  I  right? Next  11/3  now. Then  the  zero  plus  five  times  zero, five  times  zero,  still  zero, zero  plus  five  times  zero, still  zero,  and  then  zero plus  five  times  16,  5/6. Then  zero  p  five  times  8/3,  give  you  40/3. Now  you  finish  the  first  iteration  here. Now,  in  this  case  is  a  whole, the  x  one  and  x  three and  x  four  now  become  a  basic  variable. You  can  immediately  write down  the  answer  here. The  x  one  now  equals  to  one. X  one,  you  go  to  the  pivot  entry  and  you find  corresponding  the  constant  value. You  have  8/3. Because  X  two  is  non  basic  variable, so  your  x  two  is  supposed  to  be  zero  now. Then  X  three,  X  three, go  for  the  p  vt  entry  here and  find  the  right  mode,  the  constant  term. You  got  a  28/3. Then  x  four,  you  go  for  the  pivot  entry, then  look  to  the  right  mode, the  constant  terms,  56/3, and  x  five  because  x  five is  long  basic  variable  to  zero. Do  you  have  a  physical  solution  then? But  should  I  stop  here? Well,  look  at  the  last  row  here. I  realize  this  guy  is  still  negative. That  means  should  not  stop  here. Should  not  stop  here.  You  should  continue. But  now  you  look  at  the  solution  itself. I  have  x  one  equals  to  8/3, and  x  two  equals  to  zero. If  you  take  a  look  at  this  picture  here, That's  exactly  which  point? That's  exactly  this  point,  this  point  here. X  y  is  8/3,  x  two  equals  zero. In  other  words,  if  you  if you  choose  at  least  elective  one, it  actually  more  move  horizontally. I  move  horizontally. He  move  to  this  point. Then  you're  pretty  sure that  If  you  go  one  more  step, and  this  guy  will  go up  from  here,  the  jump  here. You  will  find  the  open  more  solutions  there. In  the  exam,  when I  use  when  I  ask  you  to  use  a  symplex  method, it  you  have  the  option  here. Although  by  convention, you  always  choose  the  most  negative  one. Most  negative  the  entry and  the  corresponding  column. The  correspond  variable  will  become next  basic  variable. But  if  some  of  the  guys actually  stick  to  the  least negative  I  cannot  say  you're wrong  because  you  will  still  get  answer. The  interesting  question  is  that  are  you always  getting  answer  slower  or  not? This  is  actually  the  big  question  mark. In  other  words,  if  I  don't  choose the  most  negative  entry at  the  starting  point, Am  I  always  getting  slower? That's  actually  the  question you  can  think  about  it. You  can  Google  whatever  you  can  do. But  the  bottom  line  is  that  you  will eventually  get  the  right  answer. This  is  actually  the  symplex  method, and  the  standard  procedure. Of  course,  I'm  going  to ask  you  in  the  symplex  method, if  I  because  this  one, you  have  to  have  a  s  role. If  I  actually  use  this  do  form, then  you  only  have  two  rows. But  what  I  actually  make  you  compute  easier. You  see  here.  If  you take  a  look  at  this  one  here. I  I  only  have  a  row  in  your  synplex  method. Then  am  I  getting  the  answer  quick? We  can  come  back  and  take  a  look. We  take  a  short  break  and  come  back  and  then we're  going  to  talk  about the  sensitivity  analysis  part. Give  some  examples  how  it  works. Yeah.  Then  in  the  last  session, I  will  briefly  introduce some  another  method  dealing  with  LP. Maybe  the  time  allowed, we're  going  to  briefly  introduce a  n  media  optimization. Next  week,  we  will  spend  about  1.5 an  hour  to  deal  with  the  u  um, the  complete  num  media  programming, and  then  we  prepare  for  the  quiz. All  right.  I'm  actually thinking  whether  I  should use  the  so  called  MCQ. My  choice  questions  then. Let's  just  take  easy  for  me  to  mark. Because  once  you  finish  your  quiz, I  already  know  the  answer. I  would  know  your  scores. Otherwise,  I  have  to  mark. I'm  actually  thinking, what  is  the  best  way  for  me  to  mark? But  if  I'm  going  to  use  MC  Q. It's  also  getting  easier  for  you  guys because  basically  I  gave you  a  suggesting  already. Anyway,  it's  the  option  there, either  you  use  a  pain  to  write and  take  a  photo  upload or  I  will  directly  give  you  MCQ. If  the  MCQ,  then  you  will  complete  online, you  don't  need  to  bring  any  Well, you  still  need  the  paper, but  you  don't  need  to take  a  photo  and  upload  anymore. So  I  will  let  you know  maybe  by  next  Thursday. The  case,  no  need  to  prepare  the  same  thing. On  way  is  easy  for  you  guys. The  other  way  is  easy  for  me, which  one  is  more  convenient? We  take  a  short  break,  come  back  at  the  730. Okay.  Let's  come  back  to  the  lecture. So  when  we  learn  the  duality  things, we  know  that  dealing  with  a  primal  problem, dual  problem,  you  might  encounter a  different  number  of  variables, different  construing. The  simplex  method  because you're  going  to  carry out  the  role  operational. So  it's  affected  a  lot by  the  number  of  roles. Let  me  a  number  of  construing. We  want  to  see  in  this  simple  problem, If  we  use  du  problem, solve  the  du  problem  by  using  simplex  method, would  that  actually  make  it  simpler. Now  we  try  to  solve  it. Just  for  the  illustration. You  will  see  on  the  wor  circumstances You  may  consider  others,  different  method. We're  going  to  still  write  down, based  on  this  d  problem  here, I'm  going  to  write  down the  problem  statement. Take  a  look  at  A  here  now. You  are  essentially  try  to minimize  the  z  equals  to 21  plus  242  plus  16  W  three. Then  you  subject  two. The  A  transpose  basically  is like  four  to  six,  five,  six,  four, and  W  one,  w2w3, and  no  more,  this five  and  seven.  That's  what  we  got. Okay. Which  if  you  trans  into  a  constraint, you  have  four  W  one  plus two  W  two  plus  six  W  three, no  more  than  five,  and five  w  one  plus  six  W  two  plus  four  W  three, no  more  than  seven.  All  right. And  then  you  have  W  one, W  two,  W  three, D  O,  non  negative. Okay.  So  now  I have  I  have  this  minimization  problem  there. All  right.  But  when  you  do minimization,  I  you  know, I  find  this  one  it's if  you  want  to  minimize  this  one, you  think  about  that  something  here. Okay.  Yeah,  that's  it's a  bit  strange  here  because  it  looked  like  a. Right.  Sorry,  this  is actually  something  here  now.  Be  careful  now. This  one  has  to  be  bigger  than otherwise  it's  not  right  because otherwise  you  can  see  directly  zero. They  must  be  actually  bigger  than  equal  to. Sorry,  This  is  actually  now  now  is  right. Otherwise,  you  can  directly  have a  tribal  solution.  Zero. In  this  case,  you want  to  use the  mean  operation  to  deal  with  that. Now  you  try  to  recall  how we  carried  out  the  main  operation  then. Okay.  So  try  to  see. The  table  sell  the  same  table. But  now  instead  of  using, you  know,  the  negative  one  here. So  try  to  recall. You  try  to  recall  the  formula. Right.  Recall  the  formula d.  In  the  exam, we  will  not  give  you  we  will  not give  you  the  table. You  have  to  memorize.  It's  not  going  to  be it's  not  going  to  be  in the  so  called  the  appendix. Here  actually  try  to  recall  them. This  is  actually  how  you  create  a  table. Okay.  Now  you  think about  You  write  down  here. I  mean,  basically, you're  going  to  transform  this  one into  again  you  have  to  introduce  this  is actually  not  good  idea  because  because  you have  to  deal  with  suplus  variables. Then  you  have  to introduce  artificial  variables. Everything  get  complicated. Because  if  you  actually  deal  with  this  guy, you  have  to  deal  with  the  41  plus two  W  two  plus  six  W  three, and  then  minus  be  careful  now, minus  W  four  and plus  W  five  bar  equals  to  five. W  W  four  is  a  suplus  variable, and  W  five  actually  is  artificial  variable. Then  artificial  variable  has  to  come into  this  one.  This  is  not  a  good  idea. So  Perhaps  not  a  good  idea  to  actually use  this  do  form  to  solve, use  a  simplex  method  to  solve  the  D  problem. Because  the  d  problem actually  has  to  force  you  to introduce  the  artificial  variable  coming  in. Um  Yeah,  maybe  you  should  skip  this  one. Because  in  the  exam, if  I  start  to  introduce  artificial  variable, you  have  to  deal  with  the  big  M  and  then the  two  step  procedure will  come  into  picture. Yeah.  The  big  M  is not  required  for  this  cost. The  panic  term  is  not  required. Let's  don't  do  that. I  thought  I  could  give you  a  simple  illustration, but  look  like  actually  makes things  more  complex. I  will  try  to  find  another  example. To  see  how  the  small  number  of constraints  will  bring  you something,  maybe  better. Can  you  illustrate  how it  affects  the  simplest  complexity? All  right.  Then  the  next  interesting  question is  about  the  sensitivity  analysis. I'm  going  to  still  use  this  table. I  got  two  table  now, but  I'm  going  to  use  the  first  one because  the  first  table  is  to choose  starting  from  the  most  negative  term. I  actually  terminate  one  step. Now  I'm  going  to  do  the  sent  analysis because  from  this  table, and  I  know  that  the  whole  thing, Remember  here  now,  x  one, x  two,  x  three,  x  four, and  x  five,  and  B  here, look  like  A  here. This  part  look  like  A  here. You  have  basically you're  starting  from  here  now, be  careful,  you're starting  from  here,  remember. You  have  a  four,  five,  two, six,  six, four,  negative  five,  negative  seven. You  have  100010  and  001  here. This  bottom  wide  is  all  zero,  2024  16  here. This  is  actually  the  matrix. This  is  a  matrix  A  here. This  is  actually  as  a  negative  c  transpose. Then  here  is  all  zero. We  have  the  block  of  the  so  called  A. And  I  and  followed by  negative  C  transpose  and  00. Remember?  That's  actually  what we  are  talking  about. We  start  for  the  sensitive  analysis. Let's  try  to  find the  sensitive  analysis  here. Here  you  go.  So  try  to  recall. We  learned  last  week. I  think  it's  one  Yeah. Let  me  just  try  to  see. What  is  this  1  second. Here  we  go. Okay.  We  start  from  here. We  start  from  the  table  augment the  matrix  actually  then  that's  the  starting, that's  the  first  table  look  like. Then  after  everything  is  settled  down. This  is  a  final  table. In  this  final  table, and  you  know  that  the  final  table  consists of  the  S  matrix  and  the  y  vector. Be  careful  now.  That's  the  S  matrix. Where  to  identify  the  S  matrix. Here  in  this  one. In  this  table  there. Where  is  the  S  matrix? When  everything  settled  down, Here  give  you  the  S  matrix. All  these  entries  within the  constrain  row  on  under the  so  called  snack  variable s.  Because the  snack  variable  corresponding  to the  matrix  identity  matrix  at dital  This  become  S  matrix. In  other  words,  I  have  my  S  matrix equals  to  one,  zero,  negative  5/4, 01  negative  3/2  and  001/4. I  have  this  matrix  now. Now  what  is  the  y  vector? Here  you  go.  This  is  the  y  vector  there. The  y  transpose  equals  to  zero,  07. Now  from  this  table,  I  have a  two  very  important  matrix. Y  is  the  S  matrix, the  other  one  is  y  matrix. In  this  case,  you  have  y  Sk. Now  with  this  understanding, and  we  know  that  in  case the  whole  problem  is robust  to  some  changes  of  your  parameters, and  then  the  same  S  matrix  and the  y  vector  will  stay,  will  remain. Let's  see  how  we may  perturb  the  problem  there. Remember,  if  I'm  going  to actually  perturb  right  here. No.  I'm  just  trying  to  make it  easy  for  you  to  see  here. I'm  going  to  pb  Let's  say the  first  synplist  one  is  that  I'm  going  to perturb  some  B  terms. For  example,  this  guy. Now,  this  one  start  to become  let's  say  minor  data  now. I  minor  some  data  value d.  The  data  could be  possibly  could  be  negligible. But  let's  just  make  the  debate  from  24. I  want  to  ask,  what  kind  of  data  value will  make  sure  that  this  S  is  unchanged, the  y  is  unchanged. And  most  importantly, and  the  S  and y  sound  change  self  is  desirable. But  the  critical  one  is  that  here, the  basic  variables,  which  is  X  two, X  three,  and  x  four,  they  will  stay. In  other  words,  after  perturbation, what  kind  of  data  value we'll  make  sure  that  my  X  two, X,  X  four  will  still maintain  as  the  basic  variable. If  everything  is  fine, the  S  and  the  y should  persist  should  be  there. Now  we'll  try  to  see  how  this  really  works. Now  you  have  to  take  a  look  at  this  table. This  one  here.  Take  a  look  at  this  table, how  you  derive  the  one  last  row. Okay.  I'm  going  to basically  just  write  down  copy  the  table  now. The  only  change  I  need  to  do  is that  I'm  going  to  change  the  B  vector. Because  in  this  problem  formulation  here, the  only  thing  really  change is  one  of  the  B  entry  there. The  rest,  the  A  and  the  cost  function  C, does  nothing  change,  no  change. Therefore,  I'm  going  to  construct. I'm  going  to  construct  the  table  here now,  I  have  x  one, x  two,  x  three,  x  four, and  x  five,  after  perturbation  here, your  B  now  become  a  B  C  here. It  does  actually  perturb. Because  previously,  your  B  actually is  equals  to  2024,  and  16. But  now  I'm  going  to  my  BC. Still  we  can  see  that. But  now  my  BC  has  become a  20  and  24  minus  data  and  16. 16  here.  I'm  going  to copy  basically  is  your  A. You're  going  to  still  apply  A  B. You're  going  to  actually  apply  the  S  matrix. S  is  a  summary  of the  elementary  rule  operational. You  S  apply  to  the  A, and  then  here, the  S  applied  to  the  identity  matrix. Then  the  S  also  apply  to  your  B  C, at  create  one  last  new  column. At  the  bottom  one,  you  have  the  so  called y  transpose  times  A  minus  c  transpose, just  like  just  trying  to  copy  pas. And  then  here  is  y  transpose  because y  and  C  they  are  not  supposed  to be  the  S  and  y  not  supposed  to  change. But  in  the  end  here, and  the  table  actually shows  that  you're  going  to have  a  Y  transpose  and  the  BC  here. That's  actually  if  I'm  to  follow exactly  the  same  elementary  rule  operation, which  is  contained  captured  by  the  S, and  I  should  end  up  with a  final  table  look  like  this  one. Now  I'm  going  to  check. What  kind  of  the  BC  will  make sure  this  table  is  the  final  table? That  means  I  can  stop  here. These  two  part  I  don't  need  to  change. These  two  part  I  also  don't  need  to  change. Be  my  previously, this  one  is  already  terminate, that  means  so  far  everything's  fine. The  only  thing  that  I'm  not  too sure  is  the  last  column  start  to  change. I'm  going  to  calculate.  Can  I guarantee  that  this  column, every  entry  has  to  be  non  negative? If  the  answer  is  yes,  then  I'm  done. Means,  indeed,  this  is  the  last  table. I  don't  need  any  further  iteration. I'm  going  to  calculate  S times  b  c  equals  to  one. I  have  to  s  here,  one, zero  negative  5/4,  zero, one,  negative  3/2,  001/4. Time  the  BC  here,  here  my  BC  is a  2024  minus  data  and  16. I  just  bring  in  all  this  vector or  the  matrix  in. Now  I'm  going  to  calculate, what  is  the  outcome? This  first  one  is  a  20  -16  times  5/4. This  guy  times  this  one. Then  zero  times  200, and  the  one  times  disguise, you  have  a  24  minus  Data. And  then  minus  -3/2  and  times  16. Then  this  zero  times  200  times  di  sky and  1/4  times  516. That's  what  I  got.  Okay.  This  one, I  have  the  value  of  what? 20  -20  zero. Then  24  -24  minus  Data  -24. I  B  over  two  times  this  124, then  this  one  give  you  four. Further  a  simplication,  I have  a  zero  negative  data  a  four  here. That's  basically,  I'm  going to  put  in  here  now, zero  data  and  a  four. I'm  going  to  put  here  in  this  part. This  is  the  final  optimal  solution if  everything  is  looks  okay. In  other  words,  every  entry  on  this, has  to  be  nonactive  and every  entry  here  is  non  negative, then  this  one  will  be  my  optimal  values. Now  I'm  going  to  ask  yourself, everybody  asked  yourself, what  kind  of  data will  make  this  column  to  be  valid? What  is  a  valid?  That  means  what? Every  entry  in  this  column  has  to  be  what. Non  negative. Has  to  be  non  negative. That  means  I  need, the  negative  data  has  to  be  this  one. Then  I  know  that  this  table is  indeed  the  last  table. I  don't  need  to  do  any  further. They  do  have  a  solution  there. That  suggests  that  your  data has  to  be  bigger  than  zero. In  other  words,  as  long  as the  data  is  no  bigger  than  zero, The  solution,  the  basic  variable  list is  robust  to  the  data  value  change. My  basic  variable  list, which  is  x2xx  four  will still  be  the  same  be  the  basic  variables. And  the  calcitation  will  stop  here. That's  the  robustness. The  question  is  that  you  ask  you. If  you  happen  to  choose the  data  is  a  bigger  than  role, then  you  know  that this  table  actually  suggests that  you  have  no  solution. There's  something  wrong  there, then  the  robustness  does  not  hold  anymore. The  system  will  fail the  sensitive  analysis  when your  data  is  bigger  than  zero. This  is  actually  a  very  simple  one. Of  course,  because  the  simple one  in  the  sense  that  the  A, the  C  are  not  changed. In  this  case,  this last  row,  everything  looks  fine. But  in  case,  if  I  ask  you, now  I'm  going  to  change  C  here. Okay.  I  want  to change  C,  but  I  don't  change  A. I  change  the  coefficient of  your  course  function  here. Here,  for  example,  your  C basically  equals  to  57,  C  transposes  57. Your  original  cose  problem  here, and  you  know  that  I'm going  to  write  another  one  here. Make  sure  that  we  write  clean. From  this  table,  from  this  problem  statement, I  know  that  my  C  transpose equals  to  five  and  seven, you're  coming  from  here. Five  and  seven  here.  Now  I'm going  to  perturb  this  guy. Say,  I'm  going  to use  I  put  a  C  at  the  bottom  now, and  transpose  now  or C  equals  to,  for  example, five  plus  Data  and  seven  plus. I'm  going  to  actual  perturb simultaneously.  Both  terms. Then  the  A  does  not  change. And  then  I'm  going  to create  a  new  table  as  previously, X  one,  X  two, X  three,  x  four,  and  x  five. And  here  my  B,  no  change. I'm  going  to  still  write  down  like  S  A  here, be  careful  now,  this  is  S  A  here. Then  this  is  S  here, no  change,  and  this  is a  S  times  B,  no  change. The  only  thing  really  changes is  actually  the  bottom  one. Now  you  have  one  transpose, the  A  minus  c  c  transpose. Be  careful  now.  Now  you  have  a  y  transpose. The  outcome  is  still  y  transpose  B. In  other  words,  if  everything  looks  okay, if  the  data  if the  system  is  robust  to  the  data  change, The  mo  solution  may  still  be  the  same. Let's  see  what's  going  on  is  true  or  not. In  other  words,  is  this the  final  table?  You  also  ask  yourself. After  perturbation,  am  I able  to  stop  at  this  point? How  do  I  know  what  the  stop? All  entries  on  this  line has  been  non  connected. And  all  entries  on  this  column here  has  to  be  all  non  negative  as  well. Now  you  say  I  stop  here  as  the  final  table. Now  let's  check. Previously,  we  already  say  that. A  where's  the  A here,  I'm  going  to  write  on  here. Recopy  again.  Your  A  now is  from  this  table.  This  is  your  A  here. A  equals  to  45,  2664. My  C  has  to  be  C  transpose,  is  this  guy  here. Five  plus  Data  and  a  seven  plus  dt. The  rest  is  no  change. Because  my  b  here, my  y  is  still  the  same  thing  here  now. Take  a  look  at  here.  My  y. My  y  is  trap,  zero,  seven. I  already  read  it,  from  the  previous  page. I  think  it's  a  from  here. You  read  your  y  from  here  and  your  S  is  here. But  the  bottom  ne,  I  don't  have  any  S  the, I  don't  need  to  worry  about. The  A  C  and the  Y  transpose  is sufficient  for  me  to  analyze.  Okay. Now,  let's  focus  this  one because  this  one  is  no  change. I  think  it's  perfectly  safe. Be  previously  I  already  stopped  here. That  means  my  y  is  perfectly  fine. Everything  is  non  negative. I  only  need  to  care  about  what happened  to  the  y  transpose A  minus  CC  transpose. I'm  going  to  calculate  y  transpos  A  minus  c  c transpose  007  times  A  is  four, five,  two,  six,  64  minus. CC  transpose  here.  Here  you  go. And  the  seven  plus  data. That's  I  put  in  the  formula. This  one  give  you  what?  This  basically give  you  42  and  28. A  minus  five  plus  data  and  seven  plus  data. Then  this  one  equals  to and  minus  the  body  should  fuma. 21  minus  datum. I'm  right. That  means  that  basically. The  one  last  table, this  guy  should  look  like  what? Should  look  like,  Oh, hey,  this  is  my  X  stuff. There's  my  B  here.  I  have S  A  here  and  I  have  a  S  here  fine. I  have  a  S  B.  But  then  I  have  to write  seven  minus  data. And  21  minus  data, and  I  have  007, and  then  hyper  one  transpose  B. Which  is  28.  Okay. Now,  I'm  going  to  ask  myself, what  kind  of  data  will make  this  table  be  the  final  table? What  kind  of  data  will  make this  become  a  final  table  here. How  do  I  confirm  that  I  can  stop  here  now? I  don't  need  to  further  do  the  oiization, because  this  is  already  optimal. What  kind  of  condition  guarantee  that? Because  my  S  is  unchanged,  this  role  is. I  know  that  my  basic  variable  is  still  x2x. No  change. Now,  if  I  want  to  stop, this  role  has  to  be  all  nonnative. That  means  37  minus the  data  has  to  be  di  guy. 21  data  has  to  be  di  guy  as  well. They  must  hold  simultaneously. This  one  suggests  that  your  data  is no  more  than  37  and the  data  is  no  more  than  21. Therefore,  that's  give  you  the  final  result. The  data  is  no  more  than  21. The  data  cannot  be  bigger  than  21. If  the  bigger  than  21,  you  not  stop  here. You're  not  stopping  here. You  have  to  continue. Hypothetically,  as  long  as the  data  is  normal  than  21, I  stop  there  and  the  good  news is  the  final  optimal solution  still  be  the  same. That's  the  cool  part. I  don't  need  to  recalculate. I  know  po  solution  can  not change  and  po  variable not  change  as  well.  That's  cool. Now,  if  the  data  is  22, for  example,  then  what  will  happen? Right  now,  X  X  O  is not  the  original  basic  variable  anymore. If  DI  is  22, and  then  how  should  I  continue? You  have  to  be able  hop  because  at  this  point, it  is  still  a  Synplex  table. This  column  past  non  negative, that  it's  a  still  hypothetical  solution. That  means  a  hypothetically  if my  data  in  this  cases  happens  to  be, if  I  choose  my  data, I  I  chose  my  data  is  22. Then  you  know  that your  CC  transposes  now  become a  27  and  29  now. You  basically  your  problem  is  maximize z  equals  to  27  x  one  plus  29  x  two. But  still  subject  to  the  same  constrain. Okay,  subject  to  the  same  constraint, what's  the  constraint  we're talking  about  here. Like  a  four  x  one  plus  five  x  two, no  more  than  22  x  one  plus  six  x  two, no  more  than  24,  six  x  one  plus  four  x  two, no  more  than  16,  and  x1x2  is  nonnegative  law. If  this  problem  coming  out,  give  it  to  you. And  you  realize  that  this guy  and  the  original  one, the  only  difference  is  my  C actually  is  increased  by  Data,  22  now. You  can  directly  write  down the  final  table  here,  write  on  this  table. You  know  after  all  the  S  transformation  here. I'm  going  to  have  X  one, X  two,  X  three, x  and  x  five, and  b.  I'm  going to  copy  the  three  rows  I  have  previously. Basic  hero. This  one,  I'm  going  to  copy  this  one. I'm  going  to  have  a  negative  3.5 010,  negative  5/4,  zero, negative  7001,  negative  3/2,  zero, and  then  3/2,  one, 001/4  and  four,  I'm  going  to  copy  this  one. But  the  last  row  I  have  to replace  this  new  guy, by  this  new  one  here.  What  you  got? 37  minus  data  equal  to  what? Because  the  data  is  22. I  said  the  data  is  22  here. The  37  minus  t  22  give  you  what. Give  15  here.  But  21 -22  give  you  negative  one, then  you  have  a  007, and  this  one  is  like  28. Now  you  have  this  table  here.  And  then  what? Here  you  know  that your  basic  variable  is  what, X  two,  X  three,  and  x  four. But  clearly  you  cannot  stop  here  anymore. Because  your  last  row contains  one  guy  is  a  negative. That  means  you  should  move  on, do  the  optimization  there. The  next  one,  you're  going  to  change  what. This  is  actually  very  interesting now  because  your  basic  variable actually  has  a  negative  one. What  does  that  mean?  If  the  basic  variable has  a  negative  value  with. In  other  words,  you  are  not  really going  to  make  Ida. This  one  is  actually  be careful  this  one,  originally, this  is  a  basic  variable  right because  now  this  column actually  contains  another  non zero  variable  there  now. You  know  this  guy  is  not  a  basic  variable anymore,  has  to  move  on. Now,  I'm  going  to  actually  choose. But  the  interesting  question  is  that  here, I  only  got  two  basic  variable. That's  very  strange. I'm  going  to  try  to  maintain this  one  as  my  basic  variable. I'm  going  to  actually make  this  guy  become  a  zero. That's  my  hope  here  now. Because  the  two  guys  still  basic  variable, this  one  is  not  anymore. Or  at  least  doesn't  look  like. I'm  going  to  do  one  actual  operation. Use  R  four  replaced  by  R  three  plus  R  four. I  want  to  make  this  one  become  a  zero. I  want  to  keep  this  guy  still  basic. That's  my  goal  here.  Then  I have  at  least  three  basic  variables  here. Then  the  outcome  is  what? The  outcome  is  I'm  going  to  directly draw  here  no,  draw  this  one. This  will  be  the  new R  four  here  on  the  right. Basically  this  one  A  to  this  guy. They  give  you  15  and  16.5. Now  this  one  become  zero,  zero,  zero, and  then  this  one  become  a  7.25, and  then  the  outcome  become two  here  because  of. This  one  disappeared.  Replaced  by this  new  final  entry  there. Now  you  can  see,  I'm  going  to  still have  the  same  number  of  basic  variable. But  my  final  mo  solution  changes. That  means  I  cannot  stop  at  last  matrix. I  cannot  stop  here.  I  cannot  stop  here. But  by  one  more  step, transformation  actually  again  stop. In  this  case  as  a  whole, I  realize  that  s your  data  could  be  more  than  21. But  I  can  still  guarantee, my  basic  variable  is still  the  same  as  previous  basic  variable. Although  my  S  matrix  and the  y  matrix,  could  potentially  change. In  this  case,  actually  is  not  change  at  all. The  only  change  is the  final  pm  solution  changes  there. This  is  a  very  interesting  phenomenon  there. That  means  here  you  can  analyze  that if  your  data  is  no  more  than  21, then  I  will  strictly stop  the  previous  step  for  sure. But  in  case  I  cannot  stop, I  can  possibly  do  one more  the  elementary  rule  operation. They  may  still  give you  the  optimal  solution  and the  number  based  value  may  still  be  the  same. The  only  difference  is  that  I  can guarantee  that  you  are  not  going  to stop  in  the  previous  early. So  when  you  deal with  a  more  complex  LP  problem  there, and  you  can  see  that  actually  in  case that  you  deal  with  look  like a  similarly  complete different  ogzation  problem. But  by  identify  the  the  coefficient  matrix  or the  constant  matrix  and  identify  so called  this  disturbance  term, you  may  quickly  write  down the  final  synplex  matrix. You  actually  can  you  decide whether  I  should  stop here  or  actually  continue. In  case  that  here  you  have  a  net  value  hole. It  may  not  always  guarantee that  you  have  a  optimal  solution  there. Be  careful  now.  This  one, you  happen  to  have  a  good  luck. That  means  if  I'm  going  to  maintain  the  X two  as  a  basic  variable. I  can  still  make the  final  data  role,  become  a  non  negative. In  other  words,  I  can  still maintain  the  same  set  of  the  basic  variables. But  sometimes  actually,  you  may  actually force  the  X  two  to  turn into  a  non  basic  variable. So  the  scientific  analysis actually  is  a  It  is  very  powerful, but  actually  it's  quite tedious  because  there's  a  lot  of  analysis. Just  bear  in  mind. I  want  to  emphasize  again.  All  right. When  you  try  to  analyze  You  know, the  dub  term, the  data  range,  what  kind  of  range, the  data  will  you  ensure  that the  whole  synplex  computation  will  stop exactly  at  your  previous  primal  problem or  your  sT  problem. Then  you  have  to  guarantee  that  when you  add  this  data,  the  last  role, the  negativity  things  will  not  be  changed, and  the  B,  the  column  will  never  be  changed. When  you  apply  the  same  S  matrix  and  the  Y. Factors  there.  That's  the  goal  there. In  case  that  the  question  actually  ask  you, if  I  choose  a  data, is  a  special  value. You  first  need  to  know  that what  kind  of  data  will  guarantee that  I  can  stop  there.  No  change. Then  whenever  the  given  data  value is  beyond  this  range, then  you  know  that you're  not  able  to  stop  them. You  have  to  continue  further. Then  you  into  this  formula. Bring  into  this  formula, and  then  you  try  to  identify how  do  you  proceed  from  them. What  kind  of  elemental  rule operation  I  should  apply further  to  either  I have  a  solution  or  I  have  no  solution. All  right.  Of  course,  a  simplex  method. They  do  actually  has  no  solution  case  law. I  think  I  mentioned  that  one, because  your physical  region  actually  is  empty. Region  is  empty,  then  you  have  no  solution. This  part,  I  hope  you  bear  in  mind  the  way  I analyze  the  B  column  and  the  C  vector. I  did  not  touch  the  A  yet. You  can  try  at  home  once  you  put  A there  and  then  using  the  same  table  there. Can  you  analyze,  Can  you  ascertain that  the  final  table there  will  be  the  final  one, the  table  will  be  the  final  one. Again,  you  don't  care about  this  part,  be  careful  now. You  really  care  about  this  column and  this  role  there. As  long  as  this  all  non negative  and  this  columns  all  non  negative, is  the  basic  variable  list, and  then  you  say,  I  stop,  no  change. No  change. Otherwise, your  basic  variable  list  may  change. And  you  may  also  even  end  up  with no  solution.  It's  possible. Think  about  what  kind  of things  will  have  no  solution? You  know  when  you  change  C.  Why  you  change  B? Now,  when  you  change  C  you  have definitely  have  a  solution  for  sure, if  your  original  problem  has  a  solution. But  if  I  change  B, if  I  change  A,  then you  might  have  a  problem  there. You  think  about  it.  If  you change  B  or  change  A, your  constraint  set  may  change. Then  you  might  end  up  your physical  region  become  empty. It's  possible.  You  are sure  that  once  only  changes  C, you  always  have  a  solution  if your  original  problem  has  a  solution. If  you  on  perturb  the  C  vector, can  guarantee  you  have  a  solution  in  the  end. But  if  you  perturb  your  A  matrix, you  perturb  your  vector, then  you  may  not  have  a  solution  anymore. This  bear  in  mind,  just  think  about. If  you  perturb  your  B, what  kind  of  situation you  could  have  no  solution? The  sum  B  term  become  negative. Then  you  essentially  push your  line  out  of  the  first  quadra. Then  you  know  that  actually you  have  no  solution  there. That's  why  we  always assume  that  b  has  to  be  non  negative because  the  line  has  always  has a  non  empty  intersection with  the  first  quadra. You  try  to  think  about  in a  algebra  way  and  you  visualize. Why  do  I  need  all the  B  entries  has  to  be  non  negative? Why  do  I  need  a  last  row  to  be  non  negative? The  last  row  to  be  nonnative  means that  your  cost  function will  not  be  increased  further, but  all  the  B  vector has  to  be  non  negative  because I  need  to  guarantee  that  whatever constraints  you  raw, you  will  have  ng app  intersection  with  the  first  quadrate? That's  the  motivation.  Building  in  mind, I  hope  that  in  case a  similar  problem  coming  out  in  the  quiz, you  know  how  to  deal  with  that? But  of  course,  I  only  give  you  30  minutes, so  it  cannot  be  too  complex. But  doesn't  mean  that  in  the  final  exam. Is  not  complex. Final  exam  you  got  to  s  hours. Try  a  bit  more  exercise  at  home. I  will  try  to  give  more  exercise, but  it's  just  optional  It's  not assignment.  It's  not  assignment. But  just  help  you  to  practice. If  you  solve  it,  you're  not certain  with  your  answer, you  can  come  back  to  me. We  can  discuss  offline.  Okay. Yeah,  that's  the  part I  mentioned  and  in  your  quiz, I  will  cover  graphic  method. I  will  cover  the  simplex  method, and  I  will  cover  the  scientific  analysis. Okay.  Yeah.  If  it's  a  written  one, I  mean,  maybe  up  to  two  questions. But  if  MC  Q  and  I  probably  will  cover  all. Here  is  the  three  topics  there. If  I'm  going  to  written  test, then  I  will  cover  maximum  just  two, because  you  don't  have time  to  deal  with  three. But  if  MCQ,  I  may actually  cover  every  topic  I  will  cover. We  prepare  for  that.  Okay. That's  basically  the  exercise.  All  right. And  then  we're  going  to  start  to introduce  one  more  interesting  LP  quim. But  it's  basically  dealing  with one  very  important  problem. L  et's  just  try  to  solve  one. This  is  another  one  special  type, so  called  the  stbunk  supply. Then  it's  just  for  fun. If  you  want  to  take  take a  look  will  not  be  taught  here. But  I  want  to  mention  one  very  simple  but very  very  important  problem. It  is  actually  the  assignment, resource  education  problem. Try  to  mention  this  one  here. Because  in  your  real  application, you're  going  to  frequently encounter  this  kind  of  problem. All  right?  Yeah.  Okay. Let  me  try  to  find  assignment  problem. Okay.  So  the  assignment  problem, I  would  like  to  mention  here  because  it appeared  quite  often  in  our  daily  life  there. What  is  the  assignment  problem? You  basically  have  some  jobs, then  each  job  require some  machine  to  work  on. Then  you  have  so  called  you  assign one  machine  to  each  job and  each  job  only  require  one  machine. That's  actually  a  very  special resource  allocation  problem. Because  in a  general  resource  allocation  problem, a  job  may  require  multiple  machines. And  one  machine  at each  time  can  only  serve  one  job, but  it  actually  can  serve multiple  job  in  a  different  time  period. That's  the  most  general so  called  resource  education  prob. Now  we're  dealing  with  one  very  special  type, where  you  have  a  bunch  of  jobs and  each  job  will  take  one  machine  to  finish. O  machine  can  only  be  assigned  to  one  job. It's  a  very  peculiar  feature. Okay.  So  take  a  look at  the  problem  statement  there. All  right. So  let  me  try  to  see  what  it's  actually. Here  you  go.  That's  that's a  problem  statement  here. Okay.  So  what  the  heck  is  this  one. Okay.  So  make  sure that  actually  we  got the,  that's  the  statement. Let's  see  what  it  says.  Given  n people  to  be  assigned to  jobs  with  CIJ being  the  cost  of  assigning  person I  to  job  J, and  you  find  an  assignment of  the  minimum  total  cost. You  have  resources,  each  one, each  human  is  one  resource, and  you  have  a  job. Every  human  can  be  assigned  to  one  job  and every  job  only  need  one  person  to  finish. Now,  how  do  you  formulate  this  problem? The  formulation  is  very  simple. You  just  introduce  a  variable  xi  j, where  the  I  could  be  just  person, the  person,  and  the  j  is  the  job  ID  there. When  this  one  equals  to  one, that  means  that  you're  going  to  assign the  person  to the  job  j,  it's  zero  otherwise. Now  the  optimization  problem  is  very  simple. I'm  going  to  sum  over  every  person, sum  over  every  job, and  then  you  will  multiply  xj  with  the  CIJ. In  other  words,  if  the  x  j  equal  to  one, is  a  job  j  is  assigned  to  person  I, then  it  will  incur  the  cost  of  the  Cij. Now  the  very  special  is  the  constrain  side. The  constrain  looks  really  peculiar. If  you  fix  the  i  here, fix  the  person,  sum  over  all  jobs  is  one. Now,  if  you  fix  the  job  j, the  sum  over  all  the  I  is  one  as  well. This  is  actually  you  ask  yourself, this  is  actually  integra  program  problem. Ideally,  you  think  that,  this  is  actually  the P  because  integ  programming. But  because  this  problem  is  very peculiar  in  a  very  peculiar  format. Therefore,  it  can  be  solved by  using  something  called Hungarian  hegorithm. It's  a  very  elementary  operation. And  then  Of  course, the  iteration  actually,  it  depends on  how  many  role  and  how many  people  how  many  job. But  it's  still  very  elementary. In  most  cases,  just  use  a  pain  here and  you  are  able  to quickly  determine  the  opal  solution. If  you  don't  use  this  one  and  just briefly  solve  the  integral  program  problem, I  think  you  could  actually  take a  long  time  to  deal  with  that. We'll  take  a  short  break  and  then  come  back, we're  going  to  give a  very  quick  introduction  of the  Hungarian  algithm  there. Let's  just  for  f.  This  part will  not  be  tested. This  one  is  only  for  f.  We take  a  short  break,  come  back  at  8:30. This  one  will  not  be covered  in  the  final  exam. I  can  tell  you  now,  right? Okay.  We  come  back  to  the  last  session. I  mean,  today,  actually,  mostly just  for  the  exercise. Yeah,  I  think  the  first  part, the  critical  knowledge  is basically  is  the  graphic  method, symplex,  and  sensitive  analysis. For  the  long  linear  optimization, because  in  the  end,  I'm  going  to  use  a  KKT. But  the  KKT  is  very difficult  to  manually  operate. I  will  consider  lots  of  cases  and computation  is  very  demanding when  you  use  the  KKT  manually. Okay.  So  I  don't mean  that  it  will  not  be  tested, but  for  the  nada  tization  part, which  I'm  going  to  talk  about  next  week. Mostly,  I'm  going  to  just to  test  your  basic  understanding. In  other  words,  you  may  not necessarily  ask  you  to  complete the  final  otiz  process because  may  take  a  long  discussion of  the  case  by  case. Okay.  The  focus  will mostly  be  on  today's  topic  I  mentioned. All  right?  Of  course, I  mean  more  challenging  law. I'm  not  actually  just  just  mechanical  follow. So  tricks,  of  course,  will  be  in. But  as  long  as  you  fully  understand all  the  example  example  in  your  slide, and  watch  the  video  recording today  about  the  example  I gave  and  pay  attention  to  what I  mentioned  that  I  may actually  say  some  tricks, then  it  should  be  okay.  All  right.  Okay. All  right. Next,  now  I'm  going  to  talk  about one  very  interesting  problem is  called  the  assignment  problem. Actually  a  very  special assignment  problem  there. We'll  introduce  some  very  funny  agithm. It  turns  out  actually  the  idea is  very  simple, but  look  like  actually  quite  effective to  solve  this  peculiar  assignment  problem. I  mentioned  already  in  a  previous  session, what  I'm  going  to  talk  about today  is  for  firm. It's  good  to  know  that  there's  a  one  githm  to solve  a  very  simple or  peculiar  assignment  problem, but  it  will  not  be  tested  in  the  quiz, and  it  will  also  not  be tested  in  the  final  exam. For  the  Hungarian  algorithm. Let's  come  back.  What  is the  problem  statement  here? Now  we  can  write  into  a  beautiful  table. In  this  table,  I  will  only  record  the  cost. Now  means  for  each  machine. Each  row  is  assignment  of one  machine  to  different  job  incurred  cost. And  for  one  column, and  that  means  for  each  job, if  taken  by  different  machine, what  could  be  the  cost  when  doing  this  job. You  build  this  in  mind  within  each  row, and  one  of  the  guy  will  eventually affect  your  final  cost  function because  the  machine  can only  be  assigned  to  one  job. And  every  job,  they  only  take  one  machine. That  means  during  the  final  solution, you  know  for  every  column, you  cannot  have  two  for  every  column, you  cannot  have  the  two  machines or  more  than  one  machine assigned  to  the  same  job. Similarly  for  every  row  and  you  cannot have  more  than  one  job assigned  to  one  machine. This  one  suggests  that if  you  have  a  solution  here, Then  you  realize  that  the  solution consists  of  a  different  entry  low. You  realize  that  for  every  role, you  cannot  have  more  than  one  entry be  chosen  into  the  solution. Similarly,  for  every  column, you  cannot  have  more  than  one entry  to  be  chosen  and placed  into  your  cose  function.  Take  effect. This  is  actually  the peculiar  feature  to  allow you  to  somehow  design  your  solution  strategy. What  is  the  so  called  solution  strategy? Okay.  Now,  take  a  look  at  here  now, and  this  is  actually  the  course  function looks  very,  very  long. But  the  interesting  part is  actually  the  construan  side. This  is  for  each  row  here. When  you  fix  each  row  here, the  sum  has  to  be  one. And  then  you  also  have  each  column. For  each  column  there, this  is  actually  for  the  column  side. I  think  that  this  one  I think  this  is  actually  no, I  think  a  copy  something  wrong  here. One  is  actually  should not  be  copy  paste.  Sorry. I  think  it's  a  typo  here,  right? This  one  is  supposed  to  be actually  for  every  job, the  second  entry  has  to  be  fixed. For  every  job,  then the  sum  of  the  column  has  to  be  one  as  well. The  assignment  to  the  every  variable is  either  zero,  one,  is  a  binary. Is  the  binary  program  problem or  you  can  see  integral  program  problem. If  you  don't  use  this  githm  and your  first  impression  might  be  actually  MP hard  because  because the  integra  program  complexity is  not  polyomal.  Um. Now  we're  going  to  actually use  using  the  special  feature. When  you  choose  the  variables, every  column,  there's  only  one  variable we  take  value  one. For  every  role,  there's  only  one  variable, we'll  take  value  one  there. Now  what  does  the  strategy  look  like? It's  called  a  Hungarian  method. The  Hungarian  method, actually  first  we  have  a  observation. If  this  table  has zero  value  in  each  row  and  each  column. If  you  can  find  all  zero  entries allocated  in  such  way  that when  you  choose  zero  entries, to  make  sure  that  for  every  column, there's  only  10  been. For  every  row,  there's  also only  10  entry  be  chosen. Then  you  know  the  solution  is  the  best  one. But  when  you  give  the  original  table  here, I  don't  see  any  zero. I  don't  see  many  zero  there. We  have  to  figure  out  how  do  I  create a  zero  entry  or  the  entry  with  zero  value. Now  you  take  a  look  at  each  row  here. Each  row  means  that  I'm  going  to assign  a  machine  to  different  job. If  I  start  to  scale  down  simultaneously. For  example,  so  every  course  in the  same  role  be  subtract  with  some  number, for  example,  subtract  ten  units, everybody  do  the  same  thing. Now  you  know  that  it  will  not  affect your  final  optimal  variable  choice because  you  scale  down  simultaneously  now. The  machine contribute  to  the  course  function. To  every  job  is  equally  reduced. That  means  if  I  do  this  role  operation  to subtract  the  same  number to  every  entry  in  this  role. Ideally,  they  will  not  change the  optimal  solution  there. That's  actually  the  one  observation  there. Similarly  for  the  same  column, every  single  column. If  you  subtract  every  entry in  the  column  with  a  fixed  number, same  number,  then  the common  variable  contribution to  the  so  called  machine. To  the  final  cost  function  actually  also  will not  be  affected  the  optimaticy  lo. This  of  course  it  will affect  the  optimal  value, but  it  does  not  actually  affect your  optimal  variable  choice. This  is  actually  very  sharp  inside, with  this  inside,  this  stop  to  scale  down. Take  a  look  at  what  step  works.  Step  one. In  this  table,  the  previous  table, the  s  of  the  table  there. In  each  row,  you'll  locate the  smallest  element  and  then  you'll subtract  it  from  every  element  in  that  role. In  other  words,  I'm  going  to  start to  scale  down  every  entry  in each  role  and  by subtracting  the  smallest  entry value  in  that  role. Now  you  know  that  one  of  the  entry will  become  zero,  one,  zero  coming  out. Because  every  entry  in  that  role is  scaled  down  simultaneously  equally. That  means  it  will  not  affect the  final  optimal  variable  choice. You  can  guarantee  that  the optimal  solution  will  not  be  affected. And  you  do  for  every  role. For  every  role  you  choose  the  smallest  value. For  example,  hold. Let's  take  a  look  at  the  example. Let  me  just  try  to  find the  table  there,  right? Okay.  Here  now, for  example,  take  a  look  at  the  table. You  look  at  the  row  one,  for  example, if  the  c11  happens  to  be  smallest  value, then  every  entry,  c11  subtract  c11, c12  subtract  c11,  and  C  one, subtract  c11,  everybody  subtract  this  guy. Now  you  know  that  this  entry  will become  zero,  10  coming  out. Two  for  every  row  here. For  every  row,  you  look  for the  smallest  entry  value. Then  every  entry  in that  role  will  subtract  this  smallest  value. You're  going  to  create  for every  row  one,  zero  value. You  are  certain  that  this  operation  will  not change  the  final  choice of  the  optimal  variable. In  other  words, which  variable  has  to  be  set  one? Will  not  affect  that,  okay? After  I  guarantee  that every  row  will  have  at  least  one  entry, have  a  zero  value  in  it, I  can  do  the  same  thing for  the  column  as  well. I  will  look  at  for  every  column. I  choose  the  smallest  entry  value, then  every  entry  in that  column  will  subtract  this  value. I'm  going  to  create  for  every  column, at  least  one  entry  zero. This  is  actually  will  be done  for  the  step  one. I  will  scare  down  and  to create  a  zero  entry  in  each  row,  each  column. Now  step  two  try  to  decide  whether  I can  stop  now.  How  do  I  decide? I  determine  whether  there  exists a  pasile  assignment  under what  condition  I  have a  pasial  assignment  now. That  means  I  got  up  assignment. O  involving  only  zero  cost in  the  revised  after  step  one  now. In  other  words,  if the  revised  matrix  has  in  zero  entries, no  tool  of  which  are in  the  same  row  or  column. For  every  column  you  do have  when  you  choose  a  zero  entry  level, For  every  row,  you  are  not  going  to have  a  two  chosen  zero  entry. For  every  column,  you  also  don't have  two  chosen  zero  entry. Then  you  know  this  is actually  the  one  solution  here. Actually,  you  can  prove this  is  best  solution. Otherwise,  you  cannot  stop  here. You  have  to  continue. How  do  you  continue  here? The  step  three  is  really  bizarre. They  will  try  to  cross, use  a  minimum  street  line, either  horizontal  or  vertical. They  try  to  cross  out  all  those  zero  entries. But  I  have  to  take  out  the entire  row  or  entire  column, whenever  you  usual  this  crossing  nine  d. But  you  have  to  use  a  minimum  this crossing  nine  to  remove  to cross  out  all  these  zero  entry s.  After  you  do  this  one, you  may  still  have  some  entry  left. This  is  called  uncovered. In  this  case,  you  locate  among those  uncovered  entres  which is  not  any  crossing  nine. You  locate  the  smallest  lamber from  all  these  uncovered  elements  there. Then  you  subtract  this  amber from  every  uncovered  number. That's  very  strange  operation. After  that,  you  have  the  eight uncovered  eight  smallest  number back  to  the  something called  every  element  that lies  at  the  intersection  of  two  lines. I'm  going  to  use  an  example  to explain  how  this  one  really  works. Then  after  that,  you  go  back  to this  because  you  do  this  operation, you  will  create  more  zero  entries in  your  uncovered  part. Then  you  go  back  to  step  two, you  check  whether  I  should  stop  now  because what  I  can  find  a  physical  solution. That  means  I  choose  zero  entry, I  can  guarantee  that  every  row there's  only  one  chosen  zero. Every  column,  there's  only  one  chosen  zero. There's  no  more  than  one. Then  I  can  stop.  If  it's not  Then  I  will cross  out  all  the  zero  things, use  a  minimum  crossing. I  will  repeat  step  three  again. I  repeat  it  two  and  three  Q, I  find  a  feasible  solution. It's  guarantee  you're  going  to find  a  feasible  solution. I'm  going  to  use  an  example to  showcase  to  show  this  one,  how  this  works. Now  in  this  example, some  case  people  may  not be  applied  to  certain  machine. In  this  case,  what the  suggestions  that  you're going  to  put  a  very  big  number  here. For  example,  10,000  1 million,  whatever  you  put  here. Use  this  one  say that  means  basically  you  don't choose  because  essentially  the  penalty  term. You  essentially  just  use a  very  big  number  put  here, you  fill  in  the  tire  table. Now  you  have  the  table  here. You  start  with  table. You  look  first  for  each  role. For  example,  for  role  one, For  Rule  one,  you  look  there are  four  entries  there. M  is  very  big,  302325, so  23  is  the  smallest  one. Then  you  can  use  each  entry  to  subtract  23. Be  M  is  very  big. M  -23  big. But  30  -20  37, 20  s  -20  30, and  25  -20  32. You  are  essentially  scale down  your  first  role. And  then  you  do  the  same  thing to  the  second  row  here. 34  M,  16,  24, the  16  is  the  smallest entry  in  your  second  row. Now  you  can  scale  down  the  row  two  by subtracting  the  16  by  every  entry  low. Then  you  have  whatever this  18,  zero,  and  eight. You  repeat  this  one  row  by  row, and  then  you  finish  the  roll  operation. And  then  you  can  start  to  work on  the  column,  column  by  column. Okay?  Now,  whether  should go  roll  or  should  it  go  column, it  doesn't  matter  either way  you  decide,  right? In  this  cases,  who,  for  example, you  know,  I  I think  this  one  actually  is  using  roll  now. This  is  what  I  mentioned. The  first  row  is  subtract three,  you  got  this  one. The  second  one  you  choose  second  row  here. The  second  row  basically  you  choose  16, and  the  third  row  you  choose  19, and  the  fourth  row  you  chose  14  here. You  should  anticipate. That's  why  you  have  zero,  zero, 00  because  those  are the  minimum  entry  value  located. After  this  row  operation, you  have  this  beautiful  table. Now  zero  coming  out.  That's  cool. But  you  don't  stop  here. You  now  start  to  deal with  the  column  guy  column. For  the  first  column  here, the  smallest  value  is  three. You're  going  to  actually  subtract subtract  every  entry  here by  these  three  value  there. You  have,  15,  zero,  and  four. You  finish  the  first  column. For  the  second  one  because you  already  have  a  zero  here, so  it  is  the  smallest  value, and  you  do  nothing. This  column  you  do  nothing. This  guy,  you  also  have  a  zero,  do  nothing. This  one  has  no  zero, but  then  two  is  the  smallest  one. Everybody  subtracted  two  here. Then  you  do  it  for  every  column  here, and  then  you  end  up  with  one last  give  this  term  table  here  now. You  finish  the  step  one. Then  you  check. Because  you  want  to  for  every  row, you  choose  10  entry  but  only  choose  one. Then  for  every  column, you  also  make  sure  there's  10  be  chosen. Now  you  want  to  find  whether  or  not for  every  row  because when  you  choose  a  column, say  that  for  example,  if  I  want  to choose  for  example,  the  three, I  will  choose  zero,  assign to  machine  job  one. Then  for  the  four, I'm  going  to  assign  this  guy  to  three. Then  for  the  one,  I'm going  to  assign  this  one  to  four. Then  I  know  that  the two  it's  not  properly signed,  it's  not  complete. I  need  to  make  sure  that  I  can  identify the  zero  entry  so  that every  row  there's  only  one  chosen  zero  entry. For  every  column,  there's only  one  chosen  zero  entry. This  one  is  not  satisfied. You're  not  able  to  actually have  this  lock  there. That  means  I'm  not  actually  finished  yet because  I  cannot  find a  good  minimum  assignment. What  I  can  do  is  that I'm  going  to  start  to  cross  out, start  to  cross  out  those  zero  now. But  how  do  I  cross? For  example,  I  have to  use  a  minimum  line  to  cross  out. For  example,  I  can  cross  out  the  row  three. I  can  cross  out  the  column  three, and  then  I  can  cross  out the  row  one  or  I  can cross  out  the  column  four. It's  up  to  you.  I  choose  now. In  these  cases,  I'm going  to  cross  out  the  row  one  here. I'm  cross  out  the  row  three  here, I'm  cross  out  column  three. I  will  make  sure  all  these  zero, existing  zero  B  be  crossed  out. Then  for  those  remaining  so called  uncovered  entry  there. I'm  going  to  now  use  the  step  three. The  step  say  that  among  these  things, I'm  going  to  identify  the  smallest  value. You  have  a  two  here, that  matter,  you  can  either  choose  one. For  example,  I  can  choose  this  guy. If  I  choose  this  one,  I'm  going  to  use every  other  uncovered  entry to  subtract  this  one. 15  minus  four  give  you  11,  four  minus  40. Minus  four  st,  nine  minus  45, six  minus  42,  four  minus four  g  zero.  I  finish  this  one. I  create  more  zero  now. Now  after  this  operation,  you  can  say,  Okay, at  this  moment,  I  do  have  a  more  zero  now. I'm  going  to  try  to  go  back  to  step  two. Go  back  to  step  two,  see  if  one  could assign  four  because  zero  now. I'm  going  to  give  21. B  this  one  incre  minimum  cost. Then  this  whole  role  is  exhausted. Then  for  the  three  or  machine  three. I'm  going  to  give this  guy  because  this  one  is  zero  tu, I'm  going  to  give  this  one  to  the  job two.  This  one  is  crossed  out. For  the  two,  I'm  going  to  assign this  guy  two  to  the  job  three. The  last  11  assigned  to  job  four. I  identify  those  very  distinct  zero  entre such  that  for  every  row, there's  only  10  star, for  every  column,  there's  only  10  star. If  you  find  this  situation, then  you  know  you're  down.  Perfectly  fine. Then  how  them  are  supposed to  recover  the  solution  here. This  one  basically  means  that  the x  f  one  will  be  assigned  with  a  value  one. The  x  three,  one will  be  assigned  a  value  one. X  two,  three  will  be  assigned  value  one, and  X  one,  four will  be  assigned  with  a  value  one  here. This  table  essentially  tell  you  which variable  x  j  will be  assigned  with  a  value  one  here. Now  you  have  a  four  x  i  j  now, be  assigned  with  a  value  one. Then  you  locate  the  corresponding  cost. That  means  you  go  back  to  your  cost  table, your  original  cost  table. I  think  it  is  this  guy. This  is  the  original  cost  table. Because  this  variable is  already  being  assigned  one, so  the  21  will  come  into  your  cost. This  variable  also  be assigned  with  the  value  one, the  19  will  also  go  into  the  cost. X23,  the  value  also  be  assigned  one, 16  will  go  into  the  cost. And  then  this  x14, the  value  be  assigned  one, 25  also  go  into  the  cost. The  total  cost  will  equal  to  21  plus 19  plus  16  plus  25,  and  you  are  down. You  can  prove  that  this  indeed is  the  smallest  value. This  actually  looks  very,  very  elementary. But  we  know  that  the  MP  hot  problem. The  problem  is  MP  art  by  nature. Can  the  Hungarial  method change  the  MP  hot  nature? Is  it  really  a  generate a  polynomial  algorithm  or  not?  Is  a  polyoma? Is  a  polyoma? Which  part  actually  is  getting  complex? While  you  mechanically  create  the  zero  entry. Now  I'm  going  to  ask  you, based  on  those  zero  entry, how  do  you  quickly  find  whether  they  exist assignment?  A  physical  assignment. That  means  that  every  role  there's  only  10, every  column  there's  only  10. You  have  a  multiple  zero  entry. You  have  to  choose  the  specific  entries. Can  you  use  a  polynomial  way  to find  to  chose  to decide  whether  they  exist such  choice  of  the  zero  entry. Every  role  have  only  one  chosen  zero, every  column  has  only  one  chosen  zero. Can  you  do  that? The  answer  is  no.  I  give  you  this  one. If  I  ask  you  whether  this  one  has  a  solution, has  no  solution,  or if  I  give  you  this  table  here, whether  you  have  a  solution  itself. It  is  not  a  polynomial. It's  not  a  polymal. In  other  words,  Hungarian  method  does not  change  the  MP hardness  of  the  problem  nature. Although  practically,  you  know, when  the  problem  is  not  too  complex, you  might,  quickly  see  the  answer. But  once  you  scale  to 100  time  100 and  stuff  and  so  on  and  so  forth, if  you  use  algorithm  to decide  whether  this  table has  a  solution  or  not, uh  huh,  this  is  not  a  polynomial.  All  right. So  Essentially, this  is  not  an  LP  problem  anymore, because  LP  is  polymial  solvable. But  because  they  are  involving the  minary  variables  there, so  it  is  already  way  beyond  the  LP  category. It's  an  int  program  category,  it's  MP  art. The  Hungarian  method,  solve it  in  a  heuristic  way, but  it  does  not  change  the  MP  hardness. In  other  words,  if  you  are  not  lucky, it  may  still  take  a  long  time. Although  practically  speaking,  it  will take  much  shorter  time than  your  brute  force  method, but  it's  still  not changing  the  nature  of  the  problem. You  have  the  buildings  in  mind. That's  why  I'm  not  going  to  ask  you  to test  because  it's  MP  art. If  I  give  you a  larger  question  that  it  will  take a  long  time  to  find  a  solution. To  solving  this  kind  of  problem, the  more  efficient  way is  actually  bronch  in  the  bound. The  branch  in  the  bound  is a  more  commonly  used  method to  solve  integer  programming  problem. All  right.  This  part  is  the  end  of  the  LP. For  LP,  there's  a  There's  one  problem, it's  called  supply  and  demand  matching. I  did  not  really  say  because that  problem  is  basically  is  a  mixed  integer. It's  a  mixed  in optimization  problem  by  nature. It  is  also  not  pomula. The  heuristic  actually  is  applied. You  interest,  you  can  take  a  look. But  I  can  tell  you  the  problem itself  is  very  important. The  supply  demand  supply is  commonly  used  in  our  daily  life. To  find  the  efficient  way  to  solve  it, I  certainly  has  societal  importance. In  some  sense,  The  simplex  method was  intended  also  to  solve  this  problem. The  demand  of  supply. But  the  general  demand  supplies way  more  than  the  LP. Problem  that  which  simplest  can  handle. It's  not  mandatory  to  take a  look  and  it's  fun  to  have  it. But  the  bottom  line  is  that this  heuristic  method  may not  always  guarantee  to  give you  the  sim  solution  strategy. I  could  give  you  some  hint. For  example,  when  you  take  a  look at  the  Hungarian  method, you  can  to  ask  yourself,  why do  I  really  bother  to  know  this  one? Because  I  know  it's  still  MP  hard. But  because  the  Key  ID  is that  because  every  machine  can  only  be assigned  to  one  job  If  you  start  to scale  down  all  these  costs incurred  by  this  machine  to  every  job, its  impact  to the  optimality  will  not  be  changed. That  actually  give  you  the  hint. You  can  scale  down  and has  some  deliberately  to move  towards  a  certain  entry that  will  incur  the  minimum  cost. When  the  cost  becomes  zero  now. This  is  a  very  beautiful  idea. But  there's  a  lot  of  the  insight  is  involved. In  the  future  encounter  a  similar  problem, then  this  kind  of  inside  may  help you  to  develop your  own  algorithm  using  scale  down, scale  up,  this  kind  of  things. Maybe  can  help  you  to practically  speed  up  your  computation, although  I  cannot  change the  nature  in  the  worst  case. The  next  one  would  be the  so  called  non  linear  programming. The  nina  programming  will be  tested  in  the  final  exam. But  as  I  mentioned  that, because  nina  programming  involve, mostly  the  technique  is the  KKT  because  I'm  going  to use  ground  multiply  method. The  KKT  constraining. But  the  KKT  condition to  solve  it  is  very  difficult. You  have  to  make  sure  the  case by  case  analysis, for  relatively  small  problem, it's  also  getting  complex. Therefore,  for  this  part, I  only  require  everybody  to understand  the  idea  behind  the  KKT, and  what  is  the  str  you  may  use. Okay.  If  I  ask  you  some  conceptual  question, you  know  how  to  answer  it. But  I  may  not  ask  you  to  specifically  solving the  tik  condition  to  find a  solution  of a  Lane  programming  problem  there. Buildings  in  mind,  so  don't  worry  too  much. Here,  this  one,  they  actually  also involve  some  well  behaved, but  you  have  to  impose  some  condition  there. So  Yeah, I  don't  we  can  introduce the  basic  definition  of  the NPL,  then  we'll  finish. Next  week,  I'm  going  to  introduce  two  things. One  is  introduce  one  is  so called  certain  social  algorithm. It's  just  like  a  sales  actually sampling  strategy  social  argim, with  a  proper  condition  like the  monotonicity,  this  function  there. You  can  actually  guarantee  that  they  will quickly  find  the  optimal  solution. Then  the  key  focus, I  probably  spent  half  an  hour  to  introduce a  social  algorithm  and then  one  half  an  hour  on  the  KKT  side. Then  we  start  to  do  the  quiz. That  will  be  next  weeks  the  plan. What  is  the  no  optimization  problem? I  give  you  no  need  function  here. You  can  either  minimize  or  maximize, and  then  you  have  a  construing  here. The  constrain  here,  you  also have  equality  construing and  inequity  construing. But  the  bad  news  is that  all  these  functions  are  non  eda. That  means  basically  the  physical  region. It's  not  convex  anymore. First  of  the  physical  region may  not  be  convex. The  second  one  is  that your  cose  function  may  not  be convex  or  may  not  be  concave. That  means  that  you  are  not  having a  unique  extreme  value. Even  your  course  function is  convex  or  concave  depending  on the  minimization  of  mechanization because  your  search  space  is  not  convex. You  still  cannot  guarantee where  the  optimal  solution  may  locate. This  is  actually  the  complication  there  now, because  you  are  not  guarantee  because your  solution  space  is  not  convex. You're  not  guarantee  that the  truly  pim  solution of  the  course  function  may  actually fall  into  your  physical  region. That's  actually  makes  the  no  program extremely  challenging. If  all  these  constraining  is  active, that  means  you  reach  the  equality. Then  the  things  getting  easier because  you  are  essential to  solve  the  equation. Nonna  equations. Then  you  can  always  use the  numerical  method  to solve  the  nonna  equations. But  whenever  the  equity  come  in, then  the  thing  is  getting beyond  hand  or  height. The  bottom  line  is  that  in  the  future, whenever  you  see  a  problem  formulation, where  the  cose  function, the  constru  functions,  they  can  be  nonlinear, or  one  of  the  guy  is  nonnear, then  you  are  dealing with  nonnea  programming  problem. Then  there's  quite  a  lot  of strategies  to  heuristic  solving no  the  organization  problem  there. But  in  general, the  complexity  is  extremely  high. Also  in  practical  problem, it  is  really  hard  for  us  to  know whether  you  got  the  truly global  optimal  or  not. I  practical  problem,  nobody  knows. As  long  as  can  find  that one  good  solution  is  fine. One  theoretically  interesting  question is  that, do  you  know  the  gap between  between  what  you  got, your  solution  and the  potential  optimal  solution. Many  most  of  theoretical  method  actually  just want  to  estimate  to  estimate  this  gap. Then  at  least  I  know  that  yes, I  cannot  guarantee  the optimal  global  optimal, but  at  least  I  can  tell  you  how  far, what  is  the  maximum  distance, it  could  be,  between  my  solution and  the  global  optimal  solution. All  right.  There's  so  many  methods. In  this  case,  actually, we're  going  to  talk  about  the  possibly  tool. Why  is  just  a  search. You  know,  you  just like  potion  sample  your  search  space. And  then  you  try  the  sample  0.1  by  one. Based  on  the  sample  value, you'll  know  how  to  focus on  certain  region  and  keep  sampling, take  more  sampling,  refine  this. This  is  actually  one so  called  sampling  method, and  the  other  ones  more  analytic. Is  basically  just  a  KKT  condition  there. The  KKT  is  more  like  analytic the  conditional  More  systematic. And  to  try  to  give  you at  least  a  local  optimal  solution  because  KT give  you  a  necessary  condition, but  not  sufficient. However,  next  week,  we  will  see that  the  solving  condition there  is  one  very  nasty  condition, and  one  nasty  property  there. Recall  when  I  talk about  the  dual  duality  issue  at  all, the  multiplication  of  the  snack  variable of  your  dual  problem, is  the  decision  variable  of your  primal  problem  is  always  zero. That's  actually  the  duality. Very  important  effect. That  one  help  you  to  analyze. If  you  choose  sack  variable  zero,  zero, then  the  disc  variable in  your  primal  problem  must  be  zero. The  KD  actually  has  also  one  the  condition. But  this  one  is  getting  very  nasty. Because  it  will  quickly  spend over  a  lot  of  cases. You're  going  to  see  example  next  week. I  will  stop  here.  To  me, I  think  that  my  main  job  is  LP. Bear  in  mind.  LP  s. I  don't  know.  LP  is  my  main  job here  and  it  has  a  lot  of  applications. In  case  that  you  do  have  a landa  cases  coming  out, you  can  always  use  LP  to  approximate. At  least  you  can  re,  relax your  LP  the  P  into  LP. Then  at  least  you  can  find some  solution  that  give  you  some  hint. In  many  cases,  Aina  approximation  is sufficient  to  deal with  the  optimization  problem. Pay  attention  to  LP. Pay  attention  to  what  I  mentioned, the  three  things  there, the  graphic  method,  symplex  method, and  the  senific  analysis. Then  next  week,  pay  a  little  bit  of  attention to  the  KKT  condition, and  at  least  you  know  how  to  use  it. I  don't  need  you  to  solve  it, but  at  least  you  know  how  to  use  it. Some  qualitative  question  may  be  asked. You  need  to  give  a  proper  response. That's  all  I  want  to  say. I  hope  that  you  are  not  be baffled  by  the  knowledge  I  mentioned  so  far. If  you  guys  are  really interesting  organization, Ideally,  how  this  course should  be  extended  further. But  if  you're  really  interest  in  tization, which  is  very  important, there  are  some  courses actually  dedicated  to  tiization, will  be  offered  by  other  school. This  one  is  just  a  starting  point. You  understand  something  there. Then  when  you  take a  more  advanced  course  on  tiization, then  you  know  that, which  one  you  should  focus  on. So,  that's  all  I  want  to  say. I'll  see  you  next  week  and make  sure  that  everybody bring  a  device  that  can  access  NTU  learn. Next  Thursday,  I  will tell  you  whether  I'm  going  to  use MCQ  or  I'm  going  to  just  use  a  written  test. So  stay  tuned  for  my  next  nuncement. All  right.  Thank  you  very  much. I  like  the  liens?
