Okay.  Let's  start.  Yeah. I  should  give  you  this  announcement. Next  Monday,  we  have  ft. Here  is  the  details. We  will  have  the  quiz  30-9  pm. Yeah,  that  means  I  finish  my  nture  first. Now  we  have  a  short  break. Then  we  have  the  quiz. Of  course,  the  quiz  will  be  in this  LT  and  the  duration of  the  quiz  is  minutes, as  you  can  see  from  here. This  is  a  co  quiz. For  non  Q  type  questions, you  should  show  the  king clearly  and  and  the  paper  provided. The  scope  for  the  quiz  will be  the  topics  from Chapter  one  to  Chapter  three  of  net. The  first  three  chapters. The  tag  for  this  quiz  is  just  10%. That's  why  it's  just  half  hour. Yeah,  we  have  for the  grouping  and  the  sat  arrangement, I  will  provide  you  the  detail later  because  so  far, I  don't  have  the  details of  registration  for  this  course. I  don't  know  how  many  students and  I  don't  have the  list  of  the  student  name. When  you  see,  you have  s  according  to the  group  assigned  to  you. I  will  give  you more  details  about  the  groups. You  have  to  sit according  to  the  group  assigned  to  you. We  have  a  few  blocks  here. I  will  show  you  how the  group  sitting  is  arranged. Because  we  will  take attendance  group  by  group. We  have  to  sit  in  the  group  assigned  to  you. As  I  just  mentioned, the  quiz  is  a  closed  group  quiz. You  can  bring  your  calculator, but  you  cannot  bring  unauthorized  material. I  will  provide  necessary  transform  pairs. Required  in  the  quiz. That  means  if  some  pairs  are  not  required, I  don't  provide  them. You  cannot  use  mobile  phone  during  the  quiz. Actually,  not  just  mobile  phone. Maybe  you  also  received  this  notice  here. I  should  show  you  this  notice. I  just  received  this  afternoon. You  cannot  use  phone, you  cannot  use  smart  glasses. You  cannot  use  smart  watches  so. And  you  shouldn't  have any  communication  during  the  quiz. Yeah. So  as  I  said, you  can  use  your  calculator, but  you  cannot  you  cannot use  other  unauthorized  materials. Heating  or  attempting  to  cheat  will result  in  disciplinary  action. I  received  this  slide  this  afternoon. I  just  make  this  slide  here  to  show  you. This  is  about  the  disciplinary for  closed  book  quiz  or the  rules  or  closed  book  quiz. As  just  mentioned,  attendance will  be  taken  during  the  quiz. You  have  valid  the  reasons  for  absent, you  have  to  show  me  the  proof. If  you  don't  have  such  proof, zero  market  will  be  given. Valid  the  reason  include  CC, but  you  have  to  show  me  the  MC. You  have  a  valid  reason, you  have  to  send  me  an  e  mail  by  5:00  P.M. The  next  day. That  is  the  next  Tuesday. Then  I  will  arrange  and  make  a  quiz  for  you. This  is  a  announcement. I  believe  you  also received  this  announcement  e  mail. That's  the  announcement  for  the  quiz. Now  let's  continue  with  our  ture. Next  week,  we  considered  modeling of  the  ADC  and  also  DC  with  zero. Now  we  are  going  to  continue  about  modeling of  some  of  the  blocks  in  the  system. Here,  one  important  topic is  pulse  transfer  function. Today,  we  will  start with  pulse  transfer  function. As  you  studied,  the  continuous  time  system, you  have  a  transfer  function  F a  block  like  this, for  example,  this  block. You  can  see  for  this  block, the  input  is  continuous, the  output  is  continuous. If  you  want  to  mod  this  plant, you  can  use  a  nonplus  transfer  function. For  example,  you  can  below  this  as  GPs, P  stands  for  the  plant. Then  this  can  be  written  as the  ratio  of  the  np  transform  of the  output  to the  plus  transform  of  the  input. This  is  the  model  for  the  plant. We  study  this  incontinuous  time  system. Now  for  discrete  time  system, we  have  the  same  concept, but  it's  more  complicated. In  fact,  if  we  just  consider this  plant  with  a  continuous  input  u and  the  continuous  output  y, there's  no  transfer  function. No  pulse  transfer  function. You  have  a  continuous  time  transfer  function. But  you  don't  have  pulse  transfer  function. Yeah,  we  will  make  it  clear  later. Then  In  what  case, we  have  pulse  tf  function. Let's  consider  this  system. This  system  will  have  pulse  tf  function. In  this  case,  our  input, as  you  can  see  from  this  diagram, our  input  is  continuous  time  signal  x t.  This  is  the  system we  are  considering.  We  have Input  t,  output  y  t.  But  for  this  system, it  consists  of  a  sampleer, which  is  modeled  by  I  Pe  sampner, and  the  continuous  time  plant. In  this  case,  we  will show  the  system  has a  pulse  transfer  function. Which  will  be  the  z  transform  of the  output  divided  by the  z  transform  of  the  input. We  are  going  to  derive  this. How  do  we  derive  this? We  will  use  the  convolution  som  approach. Now  let's  consider  this  system. First,  we  assume  our  input  t is  zero  for  negativity. That  means  there  is  no  input  to  the  system. As  just  mentioned,  we have  a  impulse  sampner  here. This  xt  is  sampled  by  this  impulse  samper, then  you  have  this  impulse  signal,  x  t. This  X  is  actually the  input  to the  continuous  time  system, as  you  can  see  here. This  x  t  is  not  directly  applied  to  Gs. Instead,  x  starts  apply  to  gs  here. That's  the  input  for  the  output, we  have  signal  y  t.  That's  the  output. Assume  this  system  is  coal. In  this  case,  your  output will  be  zero  for  netvity, because  if  you  have  a  zero  initial  condition, if  you  have  no  input, then  you  don't  have  output. That's  the  meaning  of  causality. Be  xt  is  zero  for  netivity. Output  will  is  zero  for  nevity  also. If  the  initial  condition of  the  system  is,  zero  initials. When  we  talk  about  transfer  function, it's  always  for  zero  initial  condition. Now,  we  are  going  to  fund the  output  y  t  under  the  input  x  start. How  do  we  compute  this  y  t? If  the  input  is  x  start? You  can  use  this  convolution integral  to  compute  the  output. F  convolution  integral,  we  have two  formula  here,  the  equivalent. This  is  a  G  t  minus  style  rile integrate  with  respect  to pot  from  zero  to  infinity. This  is  the  same.  You  just interchange  the  order  of  these  two  signals. You  can  have  x  star  t  minus  style  time  g t.  This  is  the  convolution between  G  and  x  star. This  is  the  convolution between  x  star  and  the  G. They  are  commutative, so  you  can  swap  the  order  here. This  is  the  computation  of the  output  if  we  have  input  x  star  given. Then  our  purpose  is  to fund  the  z  transform  of  the  output. We  are  going  to  fund  this  z  transform. If  you  get  y  t, then  you  can  find  a  y  z. That's  one  purpose  of the  convolutional  summation  approach. Once  we  get  the  Y  Z,  later  on, we  want  to  find  the  ratio between  Y  Z  and  X  Z. If  you  have  such  a  ratio, then  you  have  a  pulse  transfer  function. Remember,  our  purpose  is  to  find  y  t, F  YT,  we  find  Y  Z. Actually,  this  GT  is  also called  the  impulse  response  of  the  system. What  does  this  mean?  This  means, if  you  take  inverse  nope  transform  of  G, then  you  get  GT. That's  called  impulse  response  of the  transfer  functions  g. Now  let's  compute  our  output  y  t. We  are  going  to  compute  this. Here,  I  will  use  the  second  formula to  do  the  calculation. To  use  the  second  formula, I  have  two  t  to  do  the  calculation. Therefore,  I  need  some  manipulation  here. To  get  the  x  star  t  to  get  start. We  are  going  to  use  this former  as  you  just  mentioned. To  get  the  x  star  K  minor  style. We  have  to  use  this  form  for  your  x  star  t. This  is  a  chain  of impulses  as  mentioned  not  time. Graphically  is  something  like  this. Remember,  we  are  going  to  use  this. Graphically,  x  t, will  be  a  rain  of  impulses  like  this, starting  from  zero  here. T  zero,  you  have  this  impulse. T  is  T,  the  first  sample  instant, you  have  this  impulse  and  so. That's  your  t  is  a  chain  of  impulses. However,  in  our  formula, we  are  going  to  integrate  with  respect  to  t, and  we  are  going  to  find  x  t  min. To  do  this,  we have  to  find  the  extern  tile  first. That  means  if  this  is  a  tile  x, then  r  tile  will  be  like  this. That's  our  r  tile. It's  a  strain  of  impulses. Now,  in  order  to  get  x  t  min  tile, we  find  x  negative  tile  first. This  is  how  we  get  the  negative  tile. This  just  do  a  reflection. This  is,  the  netive  tile  will  be  like  this. This  is  still  the  impulse  at  time  tqu  zero. But  this  one  is  reflective  here, this  one  reflected  here. Yeah,  No  means  this  is  negative  t, this  is  negative  two  t,  and  one. This  is  This  is  our  net  to. For  this  thera  tole  is  ideal  impulse. It  is  a  unit  impulse  defined  like  this. If  the  toe  is  zero,  then the  toile  is  infinite. O  to  is  zero  that's  zero,  that's  the  to. Then  this  x0w  is the  strength  of  this  impulse. That's  the  sampling  value. This  is  the  impulse  here. Now,  we  are  going  to  compute  the  Yt. To  compute  y  t,  as  I  just  mentioned, you  have  to  get  x  star  t  minus. We  are  going  to  consider  the  following  cases. If  the  t  is  between  is  bigger  length  zero, but  less  than  t.  Then  you  just move  those  impulses  to  the  right  by  t  sec. To  get  x  star  t. Now  with  this  t  in  this  range, you  will  get  this  impulses. Yeah,  B  t  is  between  zero, bigger  the  zero,  but  less  than,  less  t. This  impulse  will  move  to  here, and  this  position  is between  zero  and  capital  t. But  this  one,  you  also  move  to the  right  by  t  second. But  this  t  is less  than  actually  strictly  lis. Is  strictly  less  than  t, then  this  still  remain  on  the  left  side. Of  course,  this  world  still remain  on  the  left  side. In  other  words,  this  impulse will  move  to  the  right  side  like  this. If  t  is  bigger  line  to  zero, but  less  than  t. Now,  if  you  use  the  formular  here,  remember, we  are  going  to  use  this  formular to  compute  our  t. Then  you  just  have  one impulse  on  the  right  side. That  is  this  impulse  on  the  right  side. O  integral,  you  can  see  that  our integral  is  from  zero  to  infinity. That  is  your  touch  is  bigger  than  zero. An  one  impulse  is  effect. Here,  if  you  do  integral of  x  star  t minus  t  times  t  t  fot  from  zero  to  infinity. You  just  have  one  term  because  of this  impulse  on  the  right  side. That  means  the  integral, which  will  give  you  y  t will  be  equal  to  this  impulse, that's  x0dt  min  t  times  dt  dt. This  is  the  application  of  our  formula  here. That's  the  application  of  this. Any  one  impulse,  that's  this. On  the  right  side,  which  means potile  from  zero  to  infinite. I  have  one  impulse. Now  you  do  integral  of  this. When  you  do  this  integrop, is  done  with  respect  to  t.  Therefore, you  can  move  this  x  zero  out. X  zero  is  constant. Then  you  have  Delta  t  minus  tile, and  you  can  change  this  t  to  t. Y. Because  if  the  tile  is  different  from  T, T  is  different  from  t,  this  will  be  zero. An  w  t  is  the  same  as  t. The  Dt  will  be  non  zero. You  can  change  this  t  to t.  Once  you  change  this  tile  two  t, you  can  move  this  GT  out  because this  is  not  a  function  of  tile  anymore. You  have  x0gt,  and  then  time  the integral  of  Delta  T  minor  tile for  tile  from  zero  to  infinity. That's  one.  So  you  have  this  answer. We  have  this  result. When  t  is  a  bigger  ng  zero  p  s  than  t, your  output  y  t  will  be  d, g  t  times  x  zero. That's  this  answer  here. This  is  the  case. When  t  is  bigger  length  zero  p  less  than t.  Now  let's  consider  this  range  of  t. With  this  range,  T  is  bigger  nn, bigger  than  or  equ  to  capit, but  list,  this  is  strict  list. L2t. Then  In  this  case, you  move  all  the  impulses to  the  right  side  by  t  second. But  this  t  is  in  this  range. Therefore,  these  two  pulses, move  to  the  right  side. Yeah,  that  means  this  pulse  will  be between  t  and  two  cap. This  impulse  will  be moved  between  zero  and  the  cat. You  have  two  impulses  on  the  right  side. Then  you  apply  the  same  former to  compute  y  t, You  will  have  two  terms  as  you  can  see  here. This  case,  you  have  two  impulses, then  you  get  two  terms  in  the  integral. One  term  is  due  to  this  impulse, and  the  other  term  is  due  to  this  impulse, as  the  second  term. T  fund  this  integral, you  just  have  x  zero, G  t,  because  t is  the  same  as  t,  that's  no  zero. When  you  find  this  integral, of  course,  this  x  capit is  move  out,  you  get  this. When  you  find  this  integral, it  will  be  g  t  minus  because  any  one  t  is equal  to  t  minus  t,  that's  no  zero. You  have  this  answer. In  this  case,  you  have  two  terms  like  this. You  continue  in  this  way. W  t  is  a  bigger  line  to  two  t, but  less  than  three  t, you  have  three  terms. Because  if  you  move this  pulses  to  the  right  side by  T  second  with  the  t  in  this  range, you  will  have  three  impulses on  the  right  side. Then  you  have  this  three  terms.  You  continue. For  obrary  k,  I  mean, obit  nonnative  integral  k, when  t  is  in  this  range, you  will  have  k  terms  like  this. This  is  the  gender  form  for  your  Y  t. W  t  is  bigger  in  and  less  than  k  plus  one  t. You  can  find  the  results  based  on our  convolutional  integral here  by  considering how  to  obtain  this  x  t for  different  range  of  t. As  you  can  see  here,  we  get different  mathematical  expression  here. Can  we  unify  all  these  expressions in  one  form? The  answer  is  yes. Actually,  you  can  unify  them. How  do  we  do  the  unification? Actually,  all  these  can be  written  in  this  form. You  know  why? Because  our  G  t  will  be  zero. Yeah.  Remember,  we  have no  output  when  we  have  electviy. We  should  have  this  conclusion. We  have  this  result. For  electvity,  our  G  t  is  zero. That  means  here  you  can  plus  zero, which  can  be  written  as  g  t  minus t.  Because  t  is  less  than  capital. That's  negative.  That's  zero. Just  plus  zero  times  x  t. This  term  is  zero  because  t is  in  this  e.  You  can also  plus  g  t  minus  2x2t. Because  this  is  also  zero, as  this  is  negative. O  t  is  less  than  t.  Of  course, it  will  be  less  than  two  t.  You  just continue  plus  all  the  zero  terms  behind. T  minus  k  t, t.  All  this  term  will  be  zero. If  your  t  is  in  this  range. B  that's  negative, that's  negative,  this  is  also  negative. O  k  is  bigger  or  equal  to  one. This  expiration  is  the  same  as  this. Same  for  second  expiration. When  t  is  less  than  two  t, then  you  can  also  plus  some  zero  terms behind  this  t  minus  2x2t. This  is  zero  because  t  is  less  than  two. You  just  continue  two  plus  g  k  t, t.  This  can  also  be  written  in  this  form. A  this  expresion  for  all  t  in  this  range, you  can  unify  name  into  one  exploration. This  exploration  can  be written  compactly  in  this  form. Yeah,  you  have  G  t  minus  t, t  for  H  from  02k. This  is  the  case  is  zero,  that's  equals  one, that  is  h  equals  k.  That's  the  first  term, second  term,  because  it  is  g  minus  t. This  is  equals  one,  that's  this. This  is  true  for  all  t  b  g  zero, p  less  than  k  plus  one t.  We  have  this  output  y  t. Once  we  have  this  output  y  t, what's  the  next  step? As  I  just  mentioned,  our  purpose is  to  compute  our  y  Z. Because  we  are  going  to fund  the  transfer  function. We  are  going  to  fund  this  y  Z. How  do  we  find  the  YZ? You  just  use  the  definition  of  z  transfer. Based  on  the  definition, you  have  to  sample  this  yt  to  get  Y  KT. You  sample  this  T  at  the  sampling  instance. K.  You  get  this  answer. Yeah,  this  y  t,  you  just  change this  t  to  K  t.  This  t, change  to  KT,  you  have  this  answer. That  is  the  yk  t.  Once  we  have  this  y  KT, we  can  compute  our  z  transfer. Yeah. Actually,  you  can  see  this  is  also the  summation  of  discrete  time  systems. If  we  start  the  convolution  for discrete  time  version  is  in  this  form. This  Y  KT  is  actually  can  be written  as  X  KT,  convolved  with  GQ. Actually,  we  can  generalize this  k  to  infinity. How  do  we  do  that? T  infinity?  You  still  use  this  fact. G  t  is  zero  for  t  less  than  zero. That  means  you  can  also  here. Yeah,  that  form,  y  t  is  obtained  from  here. You  can  actually  add  more  terms  behind. That  is  g,  for  example, t  minors  k  plus  one,  t. Yeah,  this  is  zero  because  t  is  less  on  this. This  g,  you  can  also  multiply with  x  k  plus  one  t. This  is  zero  term because  t  is  less  than  that. Then  you  can  continue until  this  go  to  infinite. Therefore,  this  k  can be  further  extended  to  infinite. By  using  this  property, g  t  minus  t  is  zero  for  bigger  than  k. That  is  H  equals  k  plus  one  plus k  plus  two  and  one  until  infinite. This  k  can  be extended  to  infinite.  You  have  this  answer. That's  our  y  k  t.  Once  we  have  this  Y  K  t, We  can  use  the  z  transform  definition to  fund  our  y  Z. In  summary,  this  is  a  Y  K  t. Y  z  will  be  to y  k  t  times z21  net  two  k  f  k  from  zero  to  infinity. That's  the  definition  of  z  transform. I  sub  this  k  to  here. You  have  this  answer.  This  part  is  y. Now,  let's  do  some  calculation. We  just  do  a  variable  change. Here,  we  have  variable.  We  have  variable  k. We  do  a  variable  change, we  define  a  new  variable, which  is  k  minus  H. Why  do  we  have  this  definition  because we  have  kt  minus  H  t  here. We  define  k  minus  H  as, then  this  will  be  gm. Of  course,  this  is  still  t, basically,  we  just  change variable  k  to  variable  m. From  this,  our  k, k  or  b  equ  to  m  plus  h. This  k  change  to  n  plus  h. How  about  this? O  k  is  from  zero to  infinite  as  you  can  see  here. If  your  k  is  zero,  actually, maybe  I  as  to  do  some  presentation  here. In  fact,  if  you  do  this, we  have  an  intermediate  term  for  this. This  is,  will  be negative  H.  I  just  write  this  here. That  will  be  from  negative. That  is  10,  that  is  negative. W  k  is  infinity, M  is  still  infinity. In  fact,  this  should  be  changed  to  that. This  smation  should  be  changed  to  this. However,  this  smation  can be  split  into  two  parts. That  is  from  negative  h  to  negative one  plus  n  from  zero  to  infinity. For  this  first  term, your  is  a  negative. When  this  is  negative, g  will  be  zero. Actually,  this  term  is  zero. Therefore,  this  two  term  will  reduce  to  this. Here.  B  for  negative, which  is  this  part,  you  get  a  zero  answer. This  will  give  you  zero. We  don't  have  to  write  this. S. This  is  a  variable  change  to  change this  two  s  into  these  two  smations? Now,  we  can  rewrite these  two  salvations  into the  product  of  these  two  terms. Because  he  from  zero  to  infinity, you  have  this  x  z  two  power of  netive  H,  that's  this. This  one  is  GM,  you  have  z  two  net. That's  combined  into  this. What  is  this  answer? This  answer  is  our  x  z. That's  our  x  z. That's  the  z  transform  of  the  input. How  about  this  part. This  part  is  the  z  transform  of  the  impulse. When  you  find  the  z  transform  this  GT, you  have  to  change  the  to  K. That  means  you  have  to  do  sample. You  have  this  GM  here. This  is  your  z  transform  of impulse  G.  And  this  is  the  form  of  the  input. Therefore,  your  y  z can  be  written  as  g  z  times  z. Now,  you  can  see  from  this  calculation. O  G  Z  can  be  written  as the  tio  between  the  output  z  transform and  the  input  z  transform. This  is  the  pulse  transfer  function for  this  system. Remember,  this  system  has  two  parts, a  sampler  together  with  transfer  function,  G. Yeah,  this  is  a  continuous  time  system. This  is  the  result  we  obtain,  normally, this  is  a  rational  function  of  z, and  this  is  called the  pulse  transfer  function  for  this  system. Once  you  have  achieved  this  g  Z, you  can  simplify  this  system  into  this  form. The  input  is  the  z  transform of  the  input  signal  xt, then  this  two  parts can  be  represented  as  pulse  transfer  fun  gz. Then  output  has  a  z  transform  y  z. You  can  see  y  z  equals  g  x. This  is  how  we  derive  the  pulse  transfer for  this  system  convolution summation  approach. The  idea  is  to  fund  the  y  first  by using  the  convolutional  submission, and  then  from  Y  you  can  get  a  Y  Z. And  you  can  write  Y  Z  as  a  this  finally. This  is  important  result.  You  can  also  see. If  you  just  use  convolutional  method  to  do the  derivation  of  pose  transfer  function, is  quite  complicated. You  can  see  even  for  this  simple system  is  very  complicated. If  you  have  more  complicated  systems such  as  feedback  system. Maybe  we  cannot  use  convolutional  summation. Then  how  do  we  fund the  pulse  transfer  function, for  a  more  complicated  system? That's  the  next  approach called  start,  non  p  transforms. We  still  consider  the  same  system. Yeah,  this  is  the  same  system. As  you  can  see  here,  For  this  system, The  input  is  continuous  t, you  have  sampler  to  get  x  star  t  as a  discrete  time  signal  applied  to the  continuous  system  with  a  transfer  for  Gs. Then  you  have  continuous  output. You  can  see  in  this  system, you  have  a  continuous  time  signal, x  t  and  the  Y  t, and  you  have  also  started signals,  which  is  r  t. This  system  has  a  mixed  of continuous  time  signal  and the  discrete  time  signals. If  you  use  this  convolution  approach, we  will  obtain  the  formula  just  established. Yeah,  that  is  this  formula  here. Now,  based  on  this  former, we  are  going  to  derived to  fund  pulse  transfer  function called  start  nonpolar. Now,  based  on  this  diagram, you  can  find  your  output  nop, which  will  be  to  gs  time. This  is  the  nop  transform  of  x  t. Now,  we  are  going  to  fund the  star  opera  transform  of  YT. In  other  words,  if  we take  star  opera  transform. On  both  sides  of  this  formula. Then  the  left  side  or  Y  star  S. Yeah,  just  like  x,  give you  style  transform  of  x, you  have  this  x  star  s. Then  the  right  side,  you also  take  a  style  transform. You  get  this  answer.  Now,  the  question is  how  do  we  simplify  this? We  are  going  to obtain  simplify  the  version  for  this. How  do  we  simplify  this? How  do  we  get  the  formula  for  this? I  think  we  have  to  use  earlier  result. That  is  the  relationship between  style  per  transform and  the  z  transform. Okay,  I  think  last  week, we  mentioned  that  this  is. Can  be  changed  to  x  z. If  you  just  change  ETs  to  z. You  don't  have  to  change  in mathematical  expression. You  just  have  replace. You  just  have  to  replace ETs  with  z.  You  get  x  Z. You  have  one  to  one  relationship. Or  you  can  change  Z  two, you  can  obtain  from  x. They  have  one  to  one  relationship by  this  simple  substitution. Okay.  Based  on  this  result, we  are  going  to  have  the  following  M. If  you  change  et  to  z, z  will  give  you  if  you  change  to  et, yz  can  be  changed  to  y  star, and  your  x  z  can  be  changed  to  x  star. Your  gz  can  be  changed  to g.  Just  replace  your  z  by  est  here. Just  now,  we  have  this  de. We  have  this  answer  dri. Therefore,  from  this,  you  have  this  result. That  means  you  can  change your  Y  Z  to  y  star  S  with  this  substitution. You  can  change  your  G  Z  to  G S.  And  you  also  can  change  x  z  to  x  star  S. This  is  from  this  bomber  derived. On  the  other  hand,  our  y  star, see  this  is  Y  star,  or  e  to  this. Therefore,  you  compare this  expression  with  this  expression. You  can  get  this  answer. That  is,  you  can  put  the  star  inside  to get  G  star  S  times  X  star. This  operation, you  can  consider  this  as  a  star  operation. We'll  give  you  this  result  based on  the  substitution  here. This  is  an  important  formula because  we  can  get our  pulse  transfer  function easily  by  using  this  formula. Yeah.  This  is  important. Later  on,  we  will  practice  how  to  use such  a  formula  to fund  our  pulse  transfer  function. Because  you  can  also  change G  star  to  GZ,  like  this. You  can  also  change  X  to. After  you  have  this  simplification, you  can  obtain  the  crison z  transform  from  here. Now  let's  example. Yeah.  I  this  speaker,  suppose. The  sampling  period  is  t, and  the  G,  this  GS is  a  first  der  transfer  function. If  the  input  this  x  t  is  unistic. We  are  going  to  verify  the  formula  here. That  is,  we  verify this  S  transform  is  this  g  star  times  X. We're  going  to  verify  this  is. How  do  we  do  the  verification? Remember,  from  the  diagram  here, O  nonpolar  transform  of  the  output  is g  time  x  star  s.  Therefore, the  left  site  is  the  same  as  y  star. If  you  can  find  y  star,  then  you  get  this. How  do  we  get  the  y  star? You  can  get  the  y  star  from y  z  because  of  this  relationship  here. Based  on  the  result,  just  the  derived. Just  now  we  have  this  formula here  derived  for  the  system, y  z  is  if  two  g  Z  time  Z. Or  GZ  can  be found  from the  z  transform  table,  it  will  be  d. Because  this  G  Z  is the  z  of  the  impulse  response  of  G. You  just  use  the  table. You  can  find  GZ. If  you  look  at  the  table,  you  have such  a  term  in  the  table. Yeah,  as  you  can  see  here. That's  your  given  G  with  A  as  one. G  Z  will  be  obtained from  the  table  as  here  with  A  being  one. That's,  X. That  is  the  z  transform  of  x  t. Based  on  this,  that's the  z  transform  of  unit  step  function. That's  the  y  z. This  is  Y  Z,  but  we're  going to  find  Y  star.  How  do  we  get  Y  star? You  use  the Substitution  here,  you  change  to  e  ts. You  have  two  z  here,  one  z  here,  one  here, you  change  two  ts. Z  inverse  will  be  changed to  eight  prove  net  St. This  was  a  change  to  net  S. That's  your  Y  s,  which  is  the  left  side? Now,  we  are  going  to verify  this  answer  equals g  star  s  time  x  star s.  Now  let's  look  at  the  G  star. What  is  G  star  is, G  star  will  be  the  star  per  transform  of  g  t. The  G  t  is  this,  here, remember,  your  g  is  given. You  have  to  fund  the  g  t. As  mentioned  earlier  here. G  t  is  the  verse  plus  trap  of  gs. That's  one  t.  G or  this  is  a  train  of  impulses. G0t  plus  g  t  t,  and  so  on. Then  you  substitute  this  e  t with  a  sample  values. G  zero  or  b  one. First  sampling  at  the  t  is  innative  t, and  this  is  in  negative  two  t, then  you  take  a  noble  transform of  g  t,  you  get  g  s. This  noble  transform  is  one. This  noble  transform  is z  two  negative  t  time  this. In  the  end,  you  have  this  answer. For  the  star  S, You  get  x  star  t  first. X  star  t  is  e  to  that, and  our  x  zero,  x  t,  x2t1. You  have  this  because  this  is a  unit  step  input. If  you  sample  the  unit  step, you  get  one  as  the  sample  the  values. Then  take  a  non  transform, you  get  this  answer,  that they  give  you  one,  that  they  will  give  this. In  the  end,  you  have  this.  Therefore,  if you  multiply  this  two,  you  get  this  answer. Clearly,  we  have  this  conclusion that  G  is  time x  star  is  x  star here  equals  g  star  time  x  star. That  means  you  can  factorize x  star  out  when  you take  no  transform  of  this  product. One  question  is,  if  you don't  have  transform  here, if  we  just  have  g,  time, and  you  want  to  take  a  star  transform. What's  the  answer. Actually,  this  one, you  cannot  have  this  factorization. You  can  obtain  a  style  opera  transform, but  you  cannot  have  this  factorization. Yeah,  we  will  show  this  later. Now,  we  consider  these  two  diagrams. This  diagram  is  the  here. But  this  one,  has  a  difference  from  that. What's  the  difference?  We  don't  have Samner  here  in  the  front. This  one,  you  have  a  Samner. In  other  words,  the  input  to  this  Gs is  directly  continuous  time  signal,  x  t. That  is  t  is  directly  applied  to  this. Now  for  this  first  diagram, We  have  this  answer  already. Now,  you  can  find  y  z  equals  g  z  time  x  z. Because  this  Stop  transform of  this  can  be  written  as  G  star  time  t, and  then  you  can  change Stop  transform  to  z  transform. You  get  y  z,  change  ys, y  star  to  z  transform, you  get  y  z.  G  star  to  gz  x  to  x  z. Therefore,  you  have  this  factor  form. Therefore,  we  have  the  pulse  transfer funk  derived  earlier  for  the  first  diagram. How  about  figure  B? In  figure  B,  we  don't have  sampner  in  front  the  Gs, as  you  can  see,  from  the  diagram. This  is  figure  B. So  we  don't  have  the  sampler in  the  input  side. In  this  case,  you  have  this  Nper  transform, y  equals  g  is  time  x  s. Yeah,  that's  very  simple from  continuous  time  system  sore. If  you  want  to  take  a  star per  transform  on  both  side, this  left  side,  get  y  star  is. Right  side,  is  the  style  transform. But  we  cannot  do  anything  to  simplify  this. We  just  write  this  g  is  time  xs  as  g  x. No  that  means  this  cannot  be  separated. Actually,  this  is  just  a  notation. Maybe  I  put  this  notation  as  a  sample. Put  a  delta  above. We  just  dilute  this  as g  this  gx  means is  the  product  between  G  and  x. That's  just  a  notation  here. So  you  cannot  do  separation. But  you  can  still  get  the  z  transform. Yeah,  this  y  star,  if you  want  to  get  z  transform, you  get  y  z,  which  is the  z  transform  crepond  into  ys. You  can  find  this  from  the  z  transform  table. This  z  transform  is corresponding  to  the  z transform  of  this  product. You  can  multiply  this  two  and then  you  get  the  np  transform. Then  from  the  table,  you  can find  the  corresponding  z  transform. Again,  we  denote,  we  just delote  this  as  the  z  transform corresponding  to  this  product, which  is  also  delode  as  G  x  z. That  is  g  and  x  cannot  be  separate, and  this  is  different  from  GZ  time  x  z. In  gender,  one  of  them  is  constant. This  is  not  separable. Therefore,  in  this  case, you  cannot  find  the  ratio  between y  z  and  x  because  this  g  x  is  not  separable. There  is  no  pulse  transfer  function for  this  second  system. No  pulse  transfer  function  for  this  system, but  you  have  pulse  transfer  function. In  summary,  If  your  input is  a  discrete  time  signal  to  the  system, you  have  transfer  function. If  your  input  is  a  continuous  time  signal, Do  pulse  transfer  function. We  have  this  important  discussion. For  figure  B,  we  don't  have pulse  transfer  function  because of  the  absence  of  the  input  sample. Yeah,  this  Sumpter  just give  you  discrete  time  signal  here. In  some  case,  in the  practical  system  may  be  like  this  here. The  input  is  discrete  time, but  we  don't  have  sampter  here. As  long  as  this  is  discrete  time, then  you  have  pulse  transfer  function. Because  the  input  is  discrete. If  we  just  consider  this  system  known, I  mean,  the  plant  unknown, the  input  is  continuous, output  is  continuous, then  you  have  pulse  transfer  function. As  just  mentioned,  that's the  case  in  figure  B. So  the  absence  of input  sampler  will  not  give  you discrete  time  input  to the  continuous  time  system. Therefore,  the  presence  of absence  of  the  input  samper is  crucial  in  this  case. But  for  the  out  side  done  the  matter. Because  the  z  this  YT  will be  the  same  as  the  z  transform  of  this  y  str. This  is  important,  but  here  is  not  important. You  have  to  a  input  the  signal  to  the  system. The  input  should  be  discrete  time. In  order  to  have  puse  transfer  function. Let's  look  at  the  example. Now,  just  mentioned,  we have a  pulse  transfer  function  for  this  system. Assume  this  GS  is given  to  B  one  over  x  plus  e. You  are  going  to  find  a  gz. Also  for  figure  B,  we don't  have  pulse  transfer  function. But  if  you  are  given  the  input,  for  example, is  input, you  can  still  find  the  d  z transform  of  the  output. There's  still  a  z  transform. Actually  the  z  transform, as  mentioned  earlier, is  just  just  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  this  product. Yeah,  you  still  have  y  Z, but  you  cannot  find the  ratio  between  y  Z  and  X  z. But  you  can  still  find  y  Z. This  example  shows  how we  fund  Y  Z  for  figure  B. Now  for  first  question, when  we  consider  figure  A, our  z  transform, G  Z  will  be  the  pulse  transfer  function. That's  the  z  transform  corresponding  to  Gs. How  do  we  find  this  z  transform? You  can  use  the  table.  Yeah. Just  now  we  have  the  table  showing  here. Based  on  this  table,  you just  use  this  term  here. That's  the  p  transfer  function  F  figure  A. Now,  for  the  second  question  in  x  size, you  need  to  find  the  y  z. If  the  input  is  the  unit  step. How  do  we  do  that?  You  find the  y  is  from  the  diagram. Ys  is  gs  time  x. Y  is  Gs  is  given  to  be  one  over  x  plus  A, your  x  is  would  one  over  S  because your  input  x  t  is  unstep  signal. That's  your  ys.  Then  y  z. Now,  I  already  mentioned  this  y  z, is  the  z  transform  of  corresponding  to  Ys, which  is  the  z  cond  to  this  product. You  can  use  the  table  also  to  find  it  answer. That's  the  No  plus  transform. Here  in  the  ne  meter  you  have  A, but  in  our  no  plus  transform  here, that's  the  product  of  this  two. You  don't  have  A,  you  just  divide  by A  by  this  result. That's  the  yz. But  there's no  pus  transfer  function  for  this. That's  the  concept about  pulse  transfer  function. Next,  recall  this  broke  diagram  again. Just  now,  based  on  our  analysis, we  don't  have a  pulse  transfer  function  for  this. Because  the  input  is  continuous  time. But  we  have  power transfer  function  for  this  two  block, because  this  input  is  discrete  time. Now,  consider  the  model  for  these  two  blocks. That  is  the  puse  transfer  function  of DAC  together  with  the  analog  system. I  already  mentioned  this  just  now. We  have  this  plan. I  assume  the  plant  has a  transfer  function  GS. Yeah.  Sometimes  we  put  the  GPS. Det  matter  just  aation. So  assume  you  are  given  this  GS, and  you  have  the  sampling  period  given. From  this  model  for  this  block, you  have  a  transfer  function. Do  you  still  remember the  transfer  function  for  this? We  de  rip,  this  transfer  function as  the  week  if  sampling  period  gave  it. The  transfer  function  of the  two  blocks  will  be  the  protot between  this  zero  or  hod  and  this  G.  Yeah. This  transfer  function  or  de,  not  stet. It  is  one  minus  e  negative  t  is  divided by  S.  And  this  is  Gs. Now  you  are  going  to  find the  pulse  transfer  function  of  this  two  blox, which  is  the  product  of this  two  transfer  Fung,  Dloted  as  excess. You  are  looking  for the  corresponding  z  transform, corresponding  to  excess. Yeah.  Remember,  we  have  pulse  transferf  for this  system  already  because we  have  a  sampler  here. Now  you  are  looking  for  the  z  transform corresponding  to  excess  with this  two  and  transfer  functions  multiplied. Yeah.  Normally,  GS  is  a  real  function  of S  because  our  physical  system is  normally  coal. For  causal  system,  GS  is a  proper  ational  function  of  S.  Therefore, you  can  rewrite  your  xs  in  this  form, which  is  to  combine  Gs  with one  over  S.  You  have  GS divide  you  just  this  100  tive  ts  here. This  is  written  in  this  form, and  we  define  Gs  over  S  as g1s.  That's  your  xs. You  multiply  g  one  to each  term  of  this  bracket, you  get  these  two  terms. Now,  we  are  going  to  find  the  z  transform, correspond  into  these  two  terms. Assume  the  impulse  response  of  g1s  is  g1t. Yeah.  That  is,  you  take an  inverse  nople  transpor  of G  one,  you  get  g1t. Then  our  x1t, which  is  the  verse  nople  transpo  of this  second  term  can  be  written  as G  one  capital  because  this  is  a  delay. Factor. If  we  studied  the  property  of  plus  transform. If  we  multiply  x  the  ts  with  this  g  one, in  time  domain  is equivalent  to  g1t  delayed  by  t  second. This  z  transform  corresponding  to  x one  or  B  z  inverse  times  z  one. This  is  the  shifting  sm  of  z  transform. Therefore,  with  this  xs, the  corresponding  z  transform  or  to the  z  transform  of  this  two  terms. Then  you  apply  the  Dial  property. This  is  the  z  transform  of the  first  term  mans the  z  transform  of  the  second  term, which  is  the  z  transform  x1t. The  Z  transform  of first  term  is  diluted  as  g1t, and  this  z  transform  is  z  inverse  time  g1z. You  can  factorize  g1z  out,  you  get  this. What  is  our  g1z? G1z  is  the  z  transform  correspond  into  G  one. That  is,  this  transfer  function. If  you  know  this  transfer  function, you  can  find  a  g1z. For  example,  you  can  find  g1z  from  the  table. In  conclusion,  if  you  have  this Non  plus  transform,  which  is  the  product  of a  zero  or  transfer  function and  a  continuous  time  transfer  function. Then  the  corresponding  pose  transfer  function can  be  obtained  as one  minor  z  inverse  times  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  gs  over  S. That  is  this. You  can  see  that  this  one  minor  two  net  to TS  can  be  simply replaced  by  one  minor  z  inverse. Yeah.  That  means  this  part can  be  si  replaced  by  one  minor  z  inverse. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. Suppose  we  have  a  zero  hold together  with  a  continuous time  transfer  function,  GS. That  is  this  plant  can be  represented  by  this  transfer  function. Yeah,  this  transfer  function can  be  a  transfer  function  of  the  same  moto. Now,  you  are  going  to fund  the  pow  transfer  function for  this  system. Just  use  the  former  g  z, will  be  the  z  transform of  this  transfer  function, and  applying  the  former  we  just  obtained, have  this  multiply  with  this  transform. One  min  z  inverse  times  the  z  transform  of this  g  is  multiply  with  one  over  S. One  over  time  that, I  get  one  over  S  square. Time  s  plus  one. You  can  do  partial  friction, expansion  of  this  so that  you  have  these  three  terms, and  you  can  use  the  z  transform  table to  get  the  z  transform  of  each  of  the  term. As  you  can  see  here.  For  this  term, it  will  be  this. Yeah.  That's  this. For  the  second  term  is  the  integrator. You  have  this  z  transform and  for  the  s  term,  you  can  use  this. You  get  this  answer. That's  the  psf  funk. Of  system  given  here  with  the  G  to  be  this. Alternatively,  you  can  see  this  is  the  figure A  with  the  G given  by  this.  Yes,  it's  the  same. G  here  is  given  by  this, and  that's  actually the  combination  of  these  two  blocks. This  is  the  mod of  The  two  blocks. As  you  can  see,  from the  simplified  block  diagram  here, we  have  found, we  have  found  the  model  for  this. We  have  found  a  model  for  this  zero  or  hold. Now  we  have  founded  the  model for  this  two  blocks. How  about  this  block?  This  block actually  is  the  digital  contoner. Normally,  this  is  designed  by  us. Consider  a  digital  contoner. Maybe  I  can  show  you  the  diagram  given  here. This  is  equent  to  this. We  have  this  digital  contoner. This  input  is  the  arrow. Output  is  M  K  or Q  or  M  K if  you  are  given  the  sampling  period. This  normally  Dloted  by  difference  equation. You  have  the  input  signal, you  have  the  output  signal. This  is  designed  by  us. You  can  use  a  difference  equation to  replace  this  continuer. With  this  input,  this  output  here. Then  you  take  a  z  on  both  sides, You  get  this  answer because  we  are  considering zero  initial  condition  when you  consider  transfer  functions. This  will  give  you  M  Z, this  will  give  you  A  one, z  inverse  M  Z  and  one, this  A  N  z  two  proto  n  time MC  because  this  is  delayed  by  n  samples. On  the  right  side,  you  have  zs. Therefore,  you factorize  M  Z  out  and  the  left, factorize  EZ  out  and  the  right. Then  you  have  this  pulse  transfer  fun. That's  the  pow  transfer  function for  digital  contoner. Normally,  this  is  designed  by  us. As  long  as  your  input  is  discrete  time, you  have  pulse  transfer  function. For  this  case,  both  input and  output  are  discrete  time. For  this  two  block, the  input  is  discrete  time. But  for  this  plan  alone, the  input  is  continuous  time, you  don't  have  pulse  transfer  function. We  have  considered  every  block  of  this. Yeah.  We  have  a  short  break, maybe  for  20  minutes, then  you  come  back  at  88. Then  we  continue  to consider  pulse  transfer  functions of  interconnected  systems. And H. H. H. H. Okay.  Let's  continue. Yeah,  we  have  considered the  mo  for  each  of  this  block, and  for  these  two  blocks, we  have  the  power  transfer  function. To  be  this  former  here. Now,  we  consider  more  complicated  systems. For  example,  if  we  have some  cascade  connections  of certain  blocks  like  this, then  how  do  we  find the  pose  transfer  function? Yeah,  we  have  two  cases. In  the  diagram  showing  figure  A. We  have  G  and  H  two  blocks. But  between  these  two  blocks, we  have  a  pulse  transfer  function. We  have  impulse  samponer. For  figure  B,  we  have the  cascade  connection  of  Gs  and  Hs, but  between  these  two  blocks. We  don't  have  a  pulse  transfer  function. S,  we  don't  have  impulse  sampner. How  do  we  find the  pulse  transfer  function  for each  of  these  two  diagrams? Yeah,  we  don't  use the  convolution  approach  to fund  the  pulse  transfer  function. Instead,  we  will  use the  style  apple  transform to  fund  the  pulse  transfer  function. Assume  all  the  sampner  are synchronized  and  have  the  same  period  ts. Then  for  Figure  A, you  can  show  that  the pulse  transfer  function  of the  pulse  transfer  function  from  input  x  t to  output  Y  t  will  be  just  a  G  Z  time  H  Z. G  Z  is  the  z  transform  corresponding  to G.  H  Z  is  the  z  trans  correspond  to  Hs. It's  the  product  of  this two  pulse  transfer  functions. But  for  figure  B,  Because there's  no  sampler  here. The  pe  transfer  fun  or to  the  z  transform  cspond  into  the  product, G  and  H.  This  product  is delotd  as  a  Gs and  the  crepon  in  Z  is  deed  as  gC. In  general,  this  is  different from  the  GZ  and  HC. How  do  we  get  this  results? Let's  look  at  the  calculations. I  put  the  figure  here  for  easy  reference. Now,  let's  consider  figure  A.  Yeah, that  is  this  figure. Based  on  this  figure, we  should  have  some of  the  nopal  transform  to  be  determined. For  example,  the  nop  transform  of  U  t is  given  by  gs  times  is  input,  x. This  is  x  t,  the  crespon  nopal  transform will  be  s  p  t. Also  for  this  block, the  output  is  y  t. The  creson  nopal  transform  is  ys. It  is  equ  to  times the  np  transform  of  u  star  t. That  is  r  s  here. We  have  this  two  equations. Here  you  can  see  that  u  star or  intermitted  variables. U  is  the  double  transform  of  t. U  star  is  the  np  transform  of  U  t. Now,  you  take a  style  pro  transform  for  both  equations, and  you  should  use the  formular  derived  earlier. Yeah. If  you  remember,  we  have this  formula  in  here. As  I  said,  this  is  a  important  formula. G,  you  take  star, it'd  be  g  x  star. You  take  a  star  er  transform  on  both  sides. For  the  first  equation,  this  will  give  you. For  the  second  for  the  right  side, you  apply  the  formula  here,  it  be  g. You  just  directly  apply  this. Similarly,  for  the  second  equation, you  take  a  star  per transform,  will  give  you  Y  star. The  star  pla  transform  of this  side  will  be  star  time  U. In  other  words,  you  can  factorize this  U  star  out  to  get  this. These  two  equations  are  in terms  of  star  per  transform. As  I  mentioned  earlier, you  can  convert  star  per  transform  to z  transform  with  this  simple  substitution. You  can  change  to  Z. And  they  also  Y  star  to  y  z. Maybe  before  you  do  that, we  do  a  substitution. Because  as  I  mentioned  earlier, star  will  be  intermediate  variable. You  substitute  this  u  star  to  here. You  have  this  equation, y  star  equals  H  star  g  X. This  is  the  output  strop  transform. This  is  the  input  pla  transform. Then  you  just  convert all  the  strop  transform  to  z  transform. Y  star  will  change  to  y  z.  H star  change  to  H  C.  G  star,  star  change  to  x. Therefore,  the  pow  transfer  function for  this  system, will  be  two  y  z  div  by  x  c, which  is  g  time. That's  this  result. Now,  for  figure  b. You  also  consider  the nop  transform  of  the  output. Based  on  this  diagram, you  can  see  the  nop  transform,  y  t  y. Now  the  y  will  to  time g  time  this  input  nop  transform,  which  is. You  have  G  star  S.  As  just  mentioned, G  is  delos  gs  time  H  is  is  deloted, as  g.  Yeah,  this is  just  a  notation  for  this  product. Now  you  take  a  star  transform  on both  side  and  the  use  this  formular  again. You  will  have  changed  to  y  star. The  star  per  transform  of  this  will  be  two, the  star  per  transform  of this  multiply  with  x  star  S. In  other  words,  this  g here  is  this  Nper  transform. If  you  take  a  star  ver  transform, you  get  this, and  then  you  change  to  Z  transform, y  star  will  change  to  y,  z. This  no  transform  will give  you  z  transform,  GC. That  is  this  one  here. That's  the  z  transform, crispond  into  this  product. And  the  x  star  change  to  x  z. You  have  this  pose  transfer  function, y  z  divide  by  x  c, which  is  gH  Z. That  is  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  gH  S. As  I  just  mentioned, this  product  is  different from  this  z  transform,  GH  Z. Now  let's  look  at  the  example,  sum, G  here  is  a  first  order  transfer  function, given  here,  one  over  x  plus  a, and  H  is  one  over  x  plus  B. For  figure  A,  you  have  this  social, for  figure  B,  you  don't  have  some  here. Therefore,  for  figure  A, the  pulse  transfer  function, or  to  gz  time  H  z. That  is  the  z  transform  corresponding  to  Gs, multiply  with  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  Hs. This  is  the  nop  transform. Then  you  use  the  table. Yeah,  this  Z  transform  table  is  very  useful. You  refer  to  this  table by  considering  this  nopnsf, you  have  this  z  transform. For  the  first  z  transform  is  this, for  the  z  transform, you  just  change  your  A  to p.  You  get  the  product. That's  the  psefer  fun. For  this  first  figure, in  which  you  have  this  pulse  sampler. For  figure  P,  You have  this  pulse  transfer  function, which  is  the  z  transform corresponding  to  the  product, and  the  product  is  just  one  of  x plus  a  times  one  of  x  plus P.  This  product  can be  rewritten  into  these  two  terms. You  can  obtain  this  by partial  friction  expansion. Now  you  use  the  table  again, this  is  constant,  so  you  can  move  out,  this. This  z  transform  obtained  from  here. For  the  second  term  is  this. You  just  do  a  subjection, you  get  this  answer. Clearly,  this  answer  is different  from  the  previous  answer. We  must  be  careful. We've  ask  you  to find  the  pulse  transfer  function. You  have  to  check  whether or  not  there  is  a  sampler between  cascaded  elements,  like  here. This  one  you  have,  this  one  you  don't  have. If  you  don't  have,  you  have  to  consider the  product  of  the  two  transfer  functions. Then  you  find  the  cresponding, z  transform  like  this. That's  for  cascade  connection,  like  this. Now,  we  have  feedback  connection. Such  as  this  figure  here. You  want  to  fund the  pulse  transfer  function  from the  input  r  to  output  C.  Yeah, clearly  it's  difficult  to  use the  convolutional  integral  method to  fund  the  pulse  transfer  fun. However,  we  will  use  the  style  per  trans. Basically,  we  need  to  use  this  bonder to  do  the  deviation. What  we  are  going  to  do  is  to  fund the  equations  in  terms  of  no  Pansfm. Then  we  take  a  stone  atnsform  and the  eliminate  the  intermediate  variables, such  as  e  here. Then  we  fund  the  relationship between  the  input  and  the  output  stops. From  that,  you  can  get the  po  transfer  function.  Let's  do  that. Let's  look  at  the  first  equation, that's  es  here. You  can  write  the  equation  directly from  the  given  diagram. This  es  is  r  s  this  signal. This  signal  is  H  H times  c.  That's  the  first  equation. Also,  this  output,  Cs  is  e  g  times e  st.  That's  from  the  diagram. You  have  the  two  equations. You  can  do  a  substitution, you  substitute  this  c  to  the  first  equation. Your  Es  can  be  rewritten  as  this  Es equals  r  minus  g  e  stop. This  is  an  important  equation, and  this  E  is  intermittent  variable. We  have  to  change  E  to  e  stu. How  do  we  do  that?  We  take st  transform  on  both  sides. On  the  left  side  is  e  change  to  e  stato. On  the  right  side,  you  have this  difference  r  min  g  eto. When  you  take  a  str  upper transform  for  subjection, you  can  move  the  star  to  each  term. The  first  term  will  be  r  star. The  second  term  intermediate  step  here. This  actually  is  e  two, r  is  miners,  G  is, e  star  is.  This  take  star. Yeah,  you  have  taking  star  p  on  both  sides. When  you  have  subtraction  or  addition, you  can  move  star  inside. That's  R  starters  H, g  is,  e  star  is.  This  stock. That  means  this  stock  can  be  moved to  here  and  the  second  term. For  this  second  term, you  can  apply  our  formula  here. Yeah,  that  is  You  can  apply  this  former. You  can  pre  to  this  former, your  G  is  the  same  as  H  G  here. This  star  can  move  to this  part,  then  time  e  star. This  e  star  is  same  as  this  star  here. You  have  to  know  how  to  apply  this former.  That's  why  you  have  this. This  G  H  star  is  the  star  letras, corresponding  to  this  product. You  just  apply  this  former, it  will  be  this  plensf  time  e  star. That's  the  e.  Now you  move  this  second  term  to  the  left, and  the  factorize  es  out, then  you  can  find  your  esta. Yeah. This  is  a  This is  to  emulate  our  intermediate  variable. As  I  said,  this  is  and e  is  intermediate  variables. We  have  this  E  star.  Now,  you  substitute. Now, you  also  consider  the  C  kind  of  equation. If  you  take  a  star  transform on  both  sides  of  this  equation, the  left  side  will  give C  star  right  side  or  E  star  time  e  star. Just  apply  this  formula  here. And  your  style  is  this. You  do  a  substitution, you  have  s  star  equals  to  this. Then  you  can  change all  the  style  upper  sns  fororm  to z  transform  because of  this  simple  substitution. That  won't  change  the mathematical  expression. This  C  change  to  CZ. G  star  change  to  GZ, R  star  change  to  R  Z, one,  steel  one,  this  G  star,  change  to  GHD. This  GH  Z  is  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  this  product. Yeah,  you  cannot  separate  this. In  fact,  in  the  diagram, this  two  between  this  G  and  H, there  is  no  sam  punter. They  cannot  be  separate. That's  CZ  equals  this. Now,  you  can  find  the  ratio, CZ,  divide  R  Z. You  have  this  pulse  transfer  function. This  is  how  you  fund the  pulse  transfer  function for  this  feedback  system. This  is  you  can  see the  styles  transform  is an  important  approach  to fund  the  pulse  transfer  function. Even  for  this  feedback  system. Now,  as  a  practice, you  can  consider  some  diagrams  in  here. Yeah.  Actually,  for  the  first  diagram, is  the  same  as  this. Except,  you  have  a  sampler here  outside  the  feedback  loop. But  this  sampler  does  not  affect  your  result. That's  why  you  have  CZ represented  in  this  fm, same  as  this.  Here,  you  can  see. You  have  a  pose  transfer  fun, CZ  divi  R  Z  to  be  G  divi  one  p  G  H  Z. As  I  said,  you  can  practice this  diagram  to  get  this  answer. In  this  case,  there  is  a  ser  between  G  and  H, so  they  can  be  separated. Here,  G  is  combined. Maybe  you  try  out  to  find  this  C  Z. Then  from  that,  you  get  the po  trans  performing  C  dive. For  this  diagram,  you  have  more  blocks, G  one,  G  two, between  G  one  and  G  two, you  have  this  sampner, and  you  have  feedback  between this  G  two  and  H.  No  sampner. You  can  see  here  in  the  result, your  G  two  and  H  is  combined. But  the  G  one  is  a  factorized  out. In  this  case,  you  have  a  po  tsfer  function because  you  can  find a  ratio  C  divid r.  That's  the  pow  transfer  function. For  this  diagram,  you  can  still  find the  CZ.  CZ  is  this. However,  there's no  pulse  transfer  function  for  this. Because  in  this  case, g  one  and  r  cannot  be  separated. You  cannot  find  the  ratio between  C  and  r  for  this  diagram. Similarly,  for  this  diagram, You  have  this  CZ,  and  you  cannot  find the  ratio  between  C  and  r. There  is  no  pe  transfer  function for  this  system. You  can  practice  how  to  use our  style  opera  transform  to  find  CZ. Just  follow  this  example  here. Okay. That's  the  pulse  transfer  functions for  feedback  system. Now,  let's  look  at the  closed  loop  pulse  transfer  function of  a  digital  control  systems. Yeah.  Just  consider this  digital  control  system, which  is  a  shown  here  also. You  can  see  you  have  two  broke  diagrams. One  is  in  figure  A, the  other  is  in  figure  B. In  figure  A,  this  broke  diagram  is  not  mode. You  see  here,  you  just  have  sampler, you  have  digital  cantoner, you  have  zero  other  hood,  you  have  plant. Now,  for  each  of  this  block, you  can  have  a  model. Esto.  This  is  the  model  in  estom. R  t  change  to  R  S.  E  change  to  es. This  sampler  is  modeled by  this  impulse  sampleer. E  KT  will  give  you e  star  S  because that's  the  sample  the  output. Yeah,  this  is  a  real  sampleer. This  is  the  model,  which  is  ideal  Sampner. You  get  the  impulse  response  here. Your  digital  controllers  domain is  just  GD  star  S, T  change  to  M  star. Zero  order  hot  has  this  transfer  function, has  the  model  plant. You  have  a  plus  transfer  function. T  change  to  S, CT  change  to  Cs. This  figure  B  is  the  model  for  figure  A. Now,  we  are  going  to  find the  close  Nop  pulse  tf  function for  this  system. Once  you  get  this  model, now  you  can  calculate the  pulse  transfer  function from  input  to  the  output. Now  let's  do  that. Now,  I  put  this  diagram here  for  easy  reference. Just  mention  this  GD. In  Z  domain,  it  will  be  GZ. You  can  just  change  the  GD  to  GDZ. S  transform  and the  z  transform  can  be  interchanged. They  are  implemented  by using  a  difference  equation. Now,  let's  look  at the  diagram  for  this  two  block. Here. And For  this  two  blocks, we  did  the  transfer  function  and  the  G  S. This  GS  is  the  pro  dot  between the  zero  order  whole  transfer function  and  the  GPS. Then  from  the  diagram, you  can  compute  the  output  pl  transform, which  is  equ  gs  times  g  times  the  input. This  equation  is  obtained directly  from  the  block  diagram. You  take  a  la  transform  on  both  sides, C  S  change  to  c  star  S.  Yeah, here,  this  product  is just  a  star  per  transform. You  apply  the  form  then,  we  just  mentioned, this  star  pla  transform  is  factorized  out, then  G  change  to  g  star. This  equation  is  in terms  of  a  star  per  transform. You  can  convert  all  star per  transform  to  z  transform. C  star,  change  to  C  Z,  G  star, change  to  g  Z,  g  star, change  to  GZ,  e  star  change  to  ea  Z. Now  we  have  this  first  equation. Actually,  this  Z  or  e  star will  be  intermediate  variable. Now  we  have  to  consider  another  equation. That  is  the  arrow  equation. Based  on  the  diagram, r  z,  or  be  to  R  z  minus  c  Z. If  you  want  to  do  more  calculation, we  have  es  equals  r  minus c.  Then  you  take  a  Str  transform, you  should  have  E  star  equals  R  minus st.  Then  you  change plus  transform  to  c  transform,  you  get  this. Now,  you  do  some  substitution. Yeah  you  just  substitute  this  to the  earlier  equation  here. Here  you  have  Z. This  EZ  should  be eliminated  because  it's  a  intermed  variable. This  is  to  replace  R  EZ. In  this  equation,  you  just  have the  output  C  Z  and  the  input  R  Z. You  just  find  out the  ratio  between  C and  r.  You  get  this  answer. That's  the  p  transfer  function for  this  feedback  system. In  this  transfer  function  GD is  designed  by  us. How  do  we  design  GD? We  will  consider  in  the  design  pot. It  will  be  covered  later. Yeah,  basically,  you  should  design  GD. In  such  a  way,  the  overall  system be  the  required  specifications. Now  this  is  the  general  case. Next,  we  consider  a  special  station. We  have  a  digital  PID  contoner. As  we  know,  if  you have  a  continuous  PID  contoner, you  will  have  this  equation. This  is  the  output  of the  conton  in  continuous  time  domain. Your  input  is  the  arrow  Et. This  is  also  incontinuous  time  domain. You  have  the  proportional  term. This  is  the  integral  term, this  is  the  derivative  term. That's  why  it's  called  PD  cont. That's  underg  consoner. Now  I  already  mentioned,  e  is the  input  to  the  consuler, empty  is  the  output  of  the  consoner. K  is  the  proportional  gain, and  this  TI  is  the  integral  time, and  the  TD  is  the  derivative  time. Now  we  are  going  to  consider the  digital  PID  conterm we  obtain  the  digital  PID  conter  from  this. Basically,  we  are  going  to fund  the  Z  function. That  is  the  post  transfer  function. To  do  this,  we  have  to  fund  our  Z. In  terms  of  ez. Then  you  find  the  ratio between  M  Z  and  the  EZ. You  get  the  po  transfer  function. Now,  we  are  going  to  sample  this  signal. This  t  will  be changed  because  you  are  looking for  the  z  transform. You  have  to  sample  the  signal, t  change  to  M  KT  and  the  right  side, et,  will  be  changed  to  Q. In  this  case,  we  have  some  approximation. For  the  first  term, we  don't  have  approximation. We  just  do  sample.  For  the  derivative  term. In  this  scree  time  domain, you  can  approximate  the  derivative  d  E  dt by  using  this  ratio. That  is  the  difference  in  the  input, ek  t  minus  one  t. That's  the  difference  between two  success  sump  values of  the  er,  then  divide  t. This  is  the  approximation  of  this  derivative. If  sample  period  is  very  small, then  you  have  smaller  approximation. For  the  integrator, we  have  this  approximation. Maybe  I'll  show  you  how  we do  the  approximation  for  the  integrator. Look  at  the  diagram  here. Suppose  our  ET  is  this  curve. Yeah,  that's  e  t  here. When  we  do  sampony, we  have  e  zero, et,  e2t,  e3t,  and  so  on. Then  when  you  consider  the  integral. That  is  this  integral,  02te. It  will  be  the  area below  the  curve.  That's  the  integral. That's  the  exact  integration. Now,  when  you  do  saping, we  have  to  approximate this  area  below  the  curve  by the  summation  of  the  areas of  a  number  of  tre  penses. For  example,  for  the  area  below  this  part, it  is  approximated  by the  area  of  this  trim  pensim. How  do  we  compute  this  area? It  will  be  this  height  plus this  height  divided  by  two,  then  times  this. This  is  t.  This  height  is  e  zero, this  height  is  e t.  You  have  e  zero  plus  e  t  divide  by  two. We  call  this  as  f  t  then  times  t  here. That's  the  First  term. Yeah,  this  t  times this  is  the  area  of  this  pens,  this  one. Then  you  have  this  second  pens, that  this  plus  this  divide  two  time  this  t. Here. This  is  the  term. T  is  a  factorize. You  just  do  this  until  the  not  chief  in  it. You  have  this  approximation of  the  integration  t times  this  summation  here. Of  course,  in  front,  you  have  TI, that  TI  is  from  the  integral  time. Now,  we  are  going  to  write this  summation  compactly  in  this  form. That  is,  we  have  E minus  one  t  plus  EHT  div  two. For  H  from  one  of  two k.  Now  our  purpose is  to  find  the  z  transform  of  each  term. This  z  transform  is  easy. I  will  be  just  easy. This  term  is  also  easy. Now  the  will  give  you  easy, this  will  give  you  z  inverse  time  easy. How  about  this  summation? We  consider  this  separate. Yeah  and  we  define  this  as F.  Something  like  this  here. Ft.  Now  let's  look  at  how  we  do  that. This  is  the  summation  term. We  define  this  summation as  y  and  this  z  transform. Of  this  summation,  or  B  two, the  z  transform  of  this  function  divided  by one  minor  z  inverse.  Why  do  we  have  this? I  think  this  was  covered  in  my  first  lecture. I  hope  you  observe  you watched  the  recorded  video  lecture. In  one  of  the  example, in  the  first  lecture, we  have  this  situation. You  are  given  the  z transform  of  this  function, you  want  to  find  the  z transform  of  this  smation. You  can  use  this  form. That  is,  it  will  be F  z  divided  by  one  minor  z  inverse. From  this,  we  have  our  F  z. Found  first.  This  F  z  is the  zs  form  of  F  K.  Remember, our  F  KT  is  defined  to  be  this  as  shown  here. This  zs  or, this  z  inverse  time easy  plus  easy  divide  by  two. Then  you  factorize  easy  out,  you  get  this, one  is  from  this  second  term, then  plus  z  inverse from  the  first  term,  then  divide  by  two. That's  the  f  z.  That's  this  z  transform. Therefore,  the  z  transform  of  this  function, that  is  the  z  transform  of  this  smation, will  be  e  two, This  z  transform  divide  by  one  minor  z, so  I  repeat  this. That's  the  z  transform for  this  summation  here. Now,  we  come  back  to  this. Yeah,  just  now  we  pay  attention to  this  z  transform. We  have  found  this  z  transform. Now,  based  on  this  equation, you  take  z  transform  and both  sides,  the  the  side, MKT  will  give  you  Z, and  the  K  is  constant. This  K  will  give  you. E  has  been  factors  out. For  this  term,  just  now, we  found  the  answer,  give  me  here. Es  is  factorized  out.  You  have  this  lift. For  the  c  term. You  should  have  TD  over  T.  T  is  here, TD  over  t,  and  this  eas  is  taken  out. You  have  one  lift. This  term  will  give  you  z  inverse. Es  also  factorize  out. That's  from  this  equation. Now,  let's  do  some  manipulation. We  the  addition  and  subtraction  here. Okay  for  this  term. We  just  the  minus  one  and  the  plus  one. When  you  do  this,  z  inverse minus  one  is  combined. This  z  -1/1  minus z  inverse,  you  get  negative  one. Netive  one  time  this,  you  get  this  term  here. Then  this  one  plus  one,  you  get  two. Two  divided  by  this  two,  you  cancel  this  two, then  you  have  t  over  t  i.  T  over  t  I  lift, and  the  denominator  is  one  min  z  inverse. You  have  this  second  term. In  other  words,  this  term  is  split  into two  terms  by  minus  one  and  plus  one  here. This  inverse  minus  one  divide  this, will  give  you  negative. Now  you  simplify  this. You  have  a  constant  gain. Plus  ki  divide  by  this  plus  k  d  time  this. Yeah,  you  can  see  that,  your  KP. This  KP  is  just  k  minus  k  time  this  ter. Your  name  for  KP  is  proportional  again. Clearly,  because  you  have this  subjection  here, so  that's  less  than the  original  proportional  gain in  continuous  time  domain. For  the  integral  gain,  Ki. B  equal  to  k  times  t  divided  by  ti. That's  this.  Therefore  KD is  called  derivative  gain. That  k  times  this. We  have  M  Z  written  in  this  form. Then  the  transfer  function, will  be  z  divid  by  ez. We  have  this  PID  pulse  transfer  function, which  has  three  terms, KP  plus  Ki  over  one  minor  z  inverse plus  KD  times  one  minor  z  inverse. You  can  see  that  in  discrete  time  domain, your  integrator  is  1/1  minor  z  inverse. In  configs  time  domain, that  is  in  estom  it  will  be  one  over S.  For  the  derivative  term, in  z  domain  is  just  one  minor  z  inverse. But  the  stoma,  it  will  be S.  That's  the  PID  pulse  transfer  function. F.  Now  let's  look  at  the  example. Here,  we  have  DGP  ID  conter. We  have  zero  order  hold,  we  have  a  plant. And  this  G  and  the  GP  can  be  found  as  this. GP  is  given  by  this. That's  the  continuous  time transfer  function  for  the  system. You  GP  is  given  to  be  this. This  GP  is  given  as  this  transfer  function. This  can  be  the  transfer  function of  a  DC  motel. Now,  if  you  sample the  signals  with a  sampling  period  of  1  second, then  the  zero  order  hold  transfer  fun. This  zero  or  transfer  function or  B  e  d.  Change  t  to  one. You  have  this  result.  Now  we are  going  to  fund  the  pulse transfer  function  for  this  two  broke. How  do  we  do  that?  You  can  apply our  earlier  formula  for  the zero  or  hold  together  with  the  or  is  that. We  have  this  formul  derived  earlier. That  is,  this  formul is  basically  one  inverse. Z  transform  is  one  under the  inverse  times  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  GPs  d  here. Yeah.  In  fact,  we  had  a  example  to  fund  this. We  just  use  the  result  of the  example.  You  get  this  answer. This  is  the  pulse  transfer  function for  this  two  props. You  should  know  how  to  fund this  pulse  transfer  function. We  were  frequently  use this  former  to  do  this. Now,  you  can  have  this  block  diagram, representation  for  these  two  blocks. This  is  the  transfer  function for  these  two  blocks. This  is  the  PID  cont  K  K, KD,  you  have  three  parameters. Now  if  you  choose  KP  21, k20  0.2,  KD  20.2, then  you  have  this PID  pulse  transfer  function. You  add  this  three  term  together, then  you  have  this  regional  function. Now  you  can  compute the  closed  doop  pulse  transfer  function. I  will  be  this  times divided  by  one  plus,  this  time  list. That's  the  former  to compute  the  close  pulse  transfer  function. Then  you  just  substitute  this  GD and  this  pulse  transfer  function to  the  former  here. After  simplification,  you  get  this  answer. That's  the  closed loop  pulse  transfer  function. If  you  want  to  find  the  output  response for  some  test  input. For  example,  if  this  is  the  unit  step, how  do  you  find  the  output? Yeah,  I  think  if  you  want  to  find  the  output, you  have  to  use  the  computational  tool for  such  a  system. Because  the  computation  of the  output  manually  is  very  theaters. Now  if  you  use  Mt  lap  with  input  to  be one  over  the  period  four  k  from 02  in  this  case  to  40. 0240  you  have  output. You  have  this  input  vector every  components  is  one  for  this  vector. You  have  41  components four  k  from  0240.  That's  the  input. Then  you  can  consider this  definition of  a  numerator  and  denominator, based  on  the  obtained closed  loop  transfer  function. You  have  this  numerator  coefficients defined  as  a  vector  NUM. You  have  the  coefficients of  the  denominator  as  the  vector  Dn. That's  the  input  and the  output  can  be  found  by  using  this  filter. If  you  do  a  matlab  operation, you  get  this  result. That's  the  output.  For  this  system. If  the  input  here is  unit.  You  have  this  output. As  you  can  see  here  for  this  output, you  have  a  notch  overshoot. Yeah,  maybe  70%. And  you  have  zero  st, because  eventually, your  output  will  track  the  reference  input. This  is  your  output, if  your  input  is  unist. Now  you  can  also  try  ramp  input. In  this  case,  you  define your  input  as  k  0-40. This  k  is  changing  0-40, and  you  have  the  same  numerator  denominator, then  you  have  the  same  command with  this  neuter  denometer  and  the  input. You  have  this  response.  This  is  the  response. This  is  our  service  chapter, which  is  about  modeling. I'll  give  you  a  summary. In  this  chapter,  we  studied  the  modeling  and the  analysis  of discrete  time  control  systems. We  have  the  following  considerations. We  have  modeled  the  Sampner  ADC by  pulse  Samp. We  have  modeled  this  zero  water  hole, and  we  also  consider the  pulse  transfer  function. That's  the  main  task  of  this  chapter. Our  quiz  next  week, will  cover  up  to  this  chapter. Yeah,  I  have  some  time to  go  through  Chapter  four. Yeah,  the  contents  of this  chapter  will  not be  covered  in  next  week's  quiz. But  it  will  be  covered  in  quiz. Yeah,  I  will  give you  more  details  about  quiz  three. When  I  come  back  later  after  propone  ture. Now  for  this  chapter, we  will  consider  some  analysis of  discrete  time  control  systems by  conventional  method. In  chapter  three,  we  already  consider  model. Now  we  are  going  to  use such  a  model  to  do  analysis. We  will  study  the  following  topics. We  will  consider  the  mapping between  plane  and  Z  plane. We  we  consider  stability  analysis of  the  closed  loop  system  in  Z  plane. We  we  also  consider Twand  and  the  S  state  rep  analysis. For  the  Twand  response, We  just  show  you  some  typical  specifications, because  manual  analysis  is  difficult. For  example,  for  this  system, if  you  want  to  find a  trans  response,  normally, you  need  to  use  a  metab such  as  the  overo,  rice  time. Yeah,  it's  difficult  to such  specifications  manually. I  will  just  give  you  some  specifications. But  for  sts  response, We  can  do  analysis. Basically,  you  can  use  final value  seria  to  do the  calculation  for  steed  state  response. The  focus  for  this  chapter is  mapping  between  S and  the  Z  plane  and  the  stability  analysis, and  the  ste  state  response  analysis. Now  let's  consider  the  mapping between  S  and  the  Z  plane. Yeah,  we  will  use this  relationship  to  consider  the  matching. S  is  a  complex  variable, which  can  be  dalted  as  sigma  plus  J  Omega. Sigma  is  a  real  part, is  the  real  part  of  S. Omega  is  the  imaginary  part. If  you  recall  complex  variable, you  will  have  two  parts.  As  shown  here. When  you  consider  S  plane,  normally, you  use  the  rectangular  form to  represent  your  complex  variable. That's  why  you  have real  part  and  the  imagining  part. But  for  variable  Z, Z  is  also  complex  variable. We  will  use  the  other  complex  representation. What  is  the  other  representation is  the  pool  of  representation. For  Z,  You  have this  representation  with  this  mapping  here. You  just  substitute  is  here. You  get  the  ter  t  times  Sigmo  plus  Omega. Just  change  is  to  this. What  is  the  representation? Pool  representation  means  you  have the  magnitude  and  phase  angle. Now,  what  is  the  magnitude for  this  com  preferable? I  just  multiply  t to  the  two  terms  in  the  bracket, you  will  have  e  t  sigma  plus  t  j  Omega. Then  when  you  consider the  exponential  function, this  will  give  you  e  t  sigma  times E  Omega  t.  What's  the  magnitude, the  magnitude  is  e  t  sigma. Then  how  about  the  angle? Omega  t.  That's the  polar  representation  for  z  variable. Normally  in  S  plane, you  use  rectangular  form. But  in  Z  plane, you  will  use  the  polar  form. For  polar  form,  the  angle  is  not  unique. Actually,  the  angle  is  multi  valued. That  means  T  omega, or  in  terms  of  angle,  that's  t  omega. But  if  you  plus  two  pi, you  have  the  same  angle. The  angle  is  multi  valued. That's  the  basic  relationship between  es  plane  and  Z  plane. Now  let's  consider  some  typical  matchings. This  will  be  used. In  this  relationship  will  be  used. Now,  the  first  mapping  we  will  consider  is the  left  off  plane  of  S  plane. Yeah,  because  for  stability of  a  continuous  system, all  the  poles  of the  closed  system  so be  in  the  left  off  plane. We  will  consider  the  mating of  lift  plane  into  Z  plane. How  do  we  do  define the  net  of  plane?  For  the  plane. For  left  of  plane, your  sigma  should  be  less  than  zero, and  then  no  restriction  on  Omega. That's  the  rest  and  sigma. The  Omega  can  be  from negative  infinity  to  positive  infinity. This  is  a  diagram  here. This  is  the  plane,  the  left  half  is  this. To  consider  the  mapping  of this  lift  off  plane  to  the  z  plane, we  consider  the  boundary  first. What  is  the  boundary?  The  boundary is  j  Omegal  x. In  this  case,  the  boundary is  the  case  C  equals  zero. Sigma  equals  zero  corresponds  to the  boundary  of  the  left  plane. Then  what  is  the  image  of  this  boundary? That  is,  what  is  the  image  of J  Omega  x  in  the  Z  plane? You  just  use  this  relationship. If  your  sigma  is  zero, this  or  b  one, Sigma  is  zero.  This  is  Q  one. Therefore,  the  image  of this  j  omega  ax corresponds  to  this  trajectory, that  is  the  magnitude  is  one. The  graphically,  this  represents  the  unit. B  for  the  unit  circle, the  magnitude  is  one. And  we  have  no  restriction on  Omega  in  this  case. That's  the  image  of  the  J  Omega  axis. Now,  for  left  off  plane, your  sigma  is  less  than  zero. When  you  consider  the  magnitude, using  this  relationship  here, if  this  is  s  zero, this  magnitude  will  be  less  than  one. Now  that  means,  it  will be  inside  the  unit  circle. The  image  of  the  left  plane will  be  inside  the  un  circle  in  the  z  plane. That's  the  conclusion  for  this  map. Actually,  you  can  do further  classifications  for  the  left  plane. The  entire  left  hof  plane is  mapped  to  the  inside  the  unit  circle. But  if  you  consider  some  strips, you  have  some  further  division. Now  let's  consider  primary  strip and  the  complementary  strips. To  do  this,  we assume  our  sampling  period  is  t. T  is  the  sampling  period. If  t  is  the  sampling  period, what's  the  sampling  frequency? It  will  be  one  over  t.  Now, if  you  consider  the  sample  frequency in  tens  per  second, that  is  Omega  S. It  will  be  two  Pi  f, it  will  be  two  Pi  divide  by  t. This  is  the  sample  frequency  Omega  S in  terms  of  tens  per  second. In  fact,  our  Omega here  is  in  terms  of  10/second. Now,  We  divide  this  left  half  plane into  a  number  of  strips. Cspond  knee,  we  divide the  J  Omega  ax  into  a  number  of  sections. This  section,  this  section,  next  sixe. For  the  primary  strip, our  Omega  is  crepon  in  this  range. Now  let's  consider  this  segment of  the  J  Omega  axe. That  is,  Omega  is  from negative  half  omega  S to  positive  half  Omega  S. What's  the  image  of this  part  of  the  j  Omega  x? The  answer  is  that  is  also  one  circle. You  can  do  a  calculation  here.  Just  use  this. Anyway,  this  readers  is  always one  because  we  are  considering  sigma  zero. If  the  sigma  is  zero,  this  is  one. Now,  how  about  the  angle? This  angle,  Now, this  starting  with  this  point. At  this  point,  your  omega is  a  negative  half  mega. You  just,  this  omega  is a  negative  half  omega A  ten  times  t.  What's  this  answer? Look  at  this  result. Omega  time  t  will  be  two  Pi. Half  omega  time  t  will  be  negative  Pi. Yeah.  Just  use  this  relationship. Now  that  means  this  point  here. Yeah,  this  point  has a  image  at  this  position. The  magnitude  is  one  angle is  negative  pie  here. Now,  you  increase  your  omega from  negative  half  omega. Then  the  angle  will  increase. That  means  this  angle  will  become  negative. That  means  this  point  or  both  on this  un  circle  in the  half  Mr..  Until  this  point, what's  this  point,  this  point is  the  origin  here. Because  at  this  position, your  readers  is  still  one, but  the  angle  is  zero  degree. That's  this  point.  Then  when  you increase  this  Omega  further, your  angle  become  positive.  Is  this. Increase  further  that  will  become  positive. Then  until  this  position, when  Omega  is  positive  half  Omega  is, then  you  do  a  calculation  here  again. Positive  half  Omega  is, Times  t,  that  will  be  Pi. It  will  go  back  to  the  this  point. You  have  one  complete  circle  in  this  case. For  this  segment  of  omega  x, you  get  one  circle. That  is  your  angle  will change  from  net  Pi  to  Pi. Then  this  strip. That  means  one  sigmaz, this  stan  zero, that  be  also  inside  the  circle. This  strip  is  called  primary  strip. That's  the  definition  of  primary  strip. This  region  is  a  map  to  inside. Now  if  you  do  analysis  for  other  strips. That  is,  if  we  consider the  j  Omega  ax  for  your  Omega  in  this  range, with  the  k  to  be  non  zero  integer. Yeah,  this  is  the  one  k  is  zero  value. If  it's  a  nonnative  integer  like this  this  part  of the  J  Omega,  you  still  get  the  er. And  those  strips  are called  complimentary  strips. Actually,  when  you  consider  sampling, your  sampling  frequency  should  be  fast enough  to  be  the  ni  quis  sampling  serum. Your  sampling  frequency  to be  at  least  twice  of the  bandis  of  your  signal. In  our  case,  we  focus Omega  to  be  in  this  range.  Yeah. Just  the  focus  Omega  in  this  range. This  is  also  required  by our  quis  sampling  ser. That  means  your  Omega  is  should be  the  sample  ser  condition. This  is  about  primary  strip and  the  complementary  strip. Let's  look  at  the  example. We  have  this  boundary  of  the  primary  sweep. We  have  position  one  here,  two, three,  three  is one  sigma  is  negative  infinity, and  four  sigma  is  a  netive  infinity, but  at  the  dower  part  of the  boundary  and  five  and  back  to  the  origin. Look  at  the  image  of  this  boundary, we  have  this  result  in  the  z  plane. You  can  see  for  the  origin, this  image  is  here because  angle  is  zero  degree, but  the  magnitude  is  one.  That's  this  point. When  one  mega  is  increase from  zero  to  half  Omega  S, then  you  get  this  semicircle, the  top  semicircle. That's  this.  Now,  when Omega  is  fixed  at  half  Omega  S, your  angle  is  fixed  at  the  pie. But  sigma  is  reducing from  zero  to  netive  infinity. If  you  use  this  mapping, when  sigma  is  reducing  from zero  to  infinity  of  zero  to  netive  infinity, then  this  will  go  to  zero  from  one. Yeah,  When  sigma  is  one, W  sigma  is  zero,  that's  one. W  Sigma  is  decreasing  to  netive  infinity, the  magnitude  will  go  to  zero. That's  2-3,  you  have  this  image. Now  3-4,  the  angle has  a  change  from  Pi  to  net  Pi. 4-5,  your  sigma  is  increasing from  netive  infinity  to zero.  That's  like  this. The  angle  remains  as  a  net  Pi, but  the  amplitude  is  increasing  0-1, and  5-1  is  this  semicircle. That's  the  image  of  this  boundary. We  have  the  napping of  constant  an  tenuation  lose. In  this  case,  we  still  have  this  variable, but  sigma  here  is  a  constant. We  have  three  possible  cases. Sigma  is  sigma  two. No  me  you  have this  vertical  nine  with  a  positive  sigma  two. You  have  zero  sigma, you  have  negative  sigma, which  is  the  negative  sigma  one. For  this  zero  sigma, you  have  the  uni  circle,  like  this. With  the  postive  sigma, sigma  two,  you  have  this  big  circle. Because  the  readers  here is  graph  Sigma  two  t. Because  Sigma  two  is  bigger  than  zero, so  the  readers  will  be  bigger  than  one. For  this  vertical  line, you  have  this  circle  here, and  this  is  a  negative  sigma  one. The  readers  is  less  than  one. This  is  how  we  consider  continua, constant  continuation. We  have  the  settle  in  time. I  think  we  will  come  back next  week  to  continue  with this  settle  in  time.  Machine. So  we  stop  here  today. M. A.
