And  the  following  is  my  contact  details. This  is  my  office  room  in  S  two, P  two,  P  45, and  this  is  my  telephone  number, but  now  I  very  few  people use  telephone  numbers. If  you  have  any  questions regarding  this  subject, you  can  send  me  e  mail. Okay.  So  I  try  to answer  your  questions  through  e  mail. If  not  possible,  you  can also  have  a  discussion  with  me. In  fact,  at  the  end  of  each  lecture, I  will  leave  some  time for  you  to  ask  a  question. Okay.  Yeah,  Our  lecture  starts  630-930. Maybe  I  will  stop  at  about  9:10, then  you  can  ask  questions  after  that. This  is  a  brief  introduction about  my  conta  details. If  you  want  to  know  more  details  about  me, you  can  visit  this  website. For  this  subject,  you can  consider  these  two  textbooks. In  fact,  naturals  are prepared  based  on  these  two  textbooks. For  the  first  four  chapters  is  from the  second  textbook  and  second  part, it  will  be  based  on  the  first  textbook. Yeah,  you  can  actually  the  first  book from  the  NTU  library. Yeah,  you  can  also  consider some  references  and  the  plenty of  examples  and  the  excise  in those  textbooks  and  references for  you  to  practice. For  us  to  have  a  better  understanding  about this  course  is  to  have some  background  in the  knowledge  of  engineering  mathematics. For  example,  complex analysis,  no  plus  transform, Why  did  I  say  this  because  in  the  past, some  students  said  they didn't  study  op  transform. That's  actually  a  fundamental  to  this  course. Our  course  is  about  computer  control  system, which  basically  is about  digital  control  system. Previously,  in  undergraduate  studies, I  believe  some  of  you  have  already  studied. Some  classical  continuous time  consul  systems. For  example,  in  NTU, students  will  study this  course  in  the  third  year. I  assume  you  have such  knowledge  and  also  some  background in  signal  and  the  systems  will  be  advantages. This  some  background  knowledge, the  teaching  sequence  for  this  subject. We  have  13  weeks. For  the  first  four  weeks, which  be  12  hours. I  will  give  you  lectures  and discrete  time  system  modeling  and  analysis. So,  just  some  fundamentals required  for  this  subject. Then  Piping  to  take  over  in Week  five  to  teach state  space  design  measures and  optimal  control. After,  he  will  spend five  weeks  to  cover  these  topics. After  this,  I  will  come  back  in  week  ten. To  consider  contonar  design based  on  transfer  functions. Yeah,  Proven  will  consider  contonar  design in  sta  space  and  also  optimal  consul. I  will  consider  contonar  design based  on  transfer  functions. Finally,  for  3  hours, I  will  cover  some  topics  and implementation  of  digital  contons. This  is  the  teaching  sequence. For  the  assessment  scheme, we  have  continuous  assessment. This  will  be  40%  of  the  entire  grid. For  this  40%,  we  have  three  quizzes. Quiz  one  is  10%. It  will  be  conducted  in  week  four. That  is  my  first  part.  This  is  10%. I  will  give  you  more  details later  about  this  quiz. P  will  give  you  quiz  two. Yeah,  he  will  make  it  the  arrangement. For  my  third  part, we  have  quiz  three, this  will  be  15%. Yeah,  I  think  this  will  be done  in  the  week  then. In  fact,  for  the  first  quiz, some  of  the  topics  in  my  first  part  won't be  covered  because  I will  do  this  quiz  in  week  four. Clearly,  the  ture  given in  week  four  will  not  be  covered. The  scope  will  be the  contents  in  the  first  three  weeks. Yeah,  so  that  you  have  time  to revise  this  three  weeks  lecture. But  the  week  f  lecture, it  will  be  considered  in  my  quiz  three. This  is  about  continuous  assessment. Yeah,  you  can  see  40%. For  final  exam,  it  will  be  60%. We  have  four  questions. Each  question  will  have  25  marks. You  can  check  past  year  papers. Yeah,  especially  recent  year  papers. We  have  four  questions. In  early  time,  we  have  five  questions, but  now  we  reduced  to  four  questions. I  said  two  questions. B  we  said  two  questions. This  exam  will  be  3  hours. A  That's the  assessment  scheme  for  this  subject. Now,  for  the  first  chapter, I  give  you  some  introduction about  computer  control  systems, or  discrete  time  control  systems. To  get  some  background, I  think  we  make  a  revision about  continuous  time  control  systems. This  is  a  block  diagram for  continuous  time  control  systems. Basically,  we  have  the system  to  be  controlled. You  can  have  many  examples for  the  system  to  be  construed. It  can  be  a  physical  system  like  aircraft, like  a  Miso  or  autonomous  car, or  even  the  temperature if  you  want  to  cont  temperature  in  this  LT. This  is  the  system  to  be  cont. It  can  also  be  social  systems or  economic  systems. O  con  system  has  a  wide  applications. You  can  have  physical  system,  social  system, economic  system, biomedical  system,  many  systems. What  do  you  control?  You  basically  control the  output  of  the  system  to  be  controlled. For  example,  the  temperature  in  this  room. Yeah,  that's  the  output. Of  course,  you  must  have an  input  variable  to  change  this  output. If  for  example,  for  DC  motor, you  want  to  control the  speed  of  the  rotation, then  the  output  can  be  the  speed of  the  rotational  speed  of  the  DS  motor. Then  you  have  to  change  the  input to  achieve  your  output. You  can  do  this  manually  by  operator. In  that  case,  the  operator  will  change the  voltage  of  the  D  motor. So  that  this  speed  will match  the  given  required  speed. But  this  is  tedious. In  our  case,  we  will  do  this automatically  by  designing  a  controller. The  contoner, Is  the  system  we  want  to  design. This  is  the  system  to  be  controlled. That  is  given.  This  is to  be  designed.  We  have  to  design  this. We  design  this  controller to  change  the  input  to  the  system. That  this  output,  we  follow the  given  reference  automatically. This  is  a  feedback  control  system, which  is  also  automatic  control  system. You  can  see  this  reference  is  given. For  example,  maybe  the  temperature  in this  room  is  given  to  be  20  degree. You  want  the  room  temperature to  be  20  degree. That's  the  reference  input. Then  you  have  to  measure,  you  have a  sensor  to  measure the  temperature  in  the  room. This  is  the  actual  output. You  feed  back  this  measurement  and compare  with  the  given  reference. You  get  the  arrow.  For  example, now  the  temperatures  25  degree, which  is  higher  than  the  reference. You  have  two  F  the  controoner, such  that  the  output  of  the  conter  which  is the  input  to  the  system to  change  this  output, to  track  the  reference  input. This  is  the  basic  idea of  feedback  control  system. You  can  see  this  is  the  objective. We  want  to  make  the  system  output and  the  desired  reference as  close  as  possible. That  is  to  make  the  ero as  small  as  possible,  this  era. Ideally,  this  er  should  approach  to  zero. That's  the  accuracy  of  your  control  system. This  is  a  broke  diagram based  on  the  physical  meanings. Now,  when  we  want  to  design  this  controller, we  have  to  abstract  our  system. To  a  mathematical  model. This  system  we  use  model  to  represent  it. This  is  a  mathematic  model. This  model  is  just  relate the  input  to  the  output. This  model  the  input  out of  the  relationship  of the  system  to  be  controlled. Yeah,  you  have  to  find  this  model. You  can  find  this  model based  on  the  given  system. And  also  the  given  input  and  output. For  example,  for  the  DC  motel, the  input  assessed  can  be voltage  applied  to  the  motel. Oput  can  be  either  position, angular  position,  or  speed. You  can  establish  a  relationship between  the  input  and  output. In  classical  control  or in  continuous  time  control  system, we  use  a  transfer  function. To  represent  this  system. That's  a  model  for  the  system. That  is  you  have  this  input T  through  this  model,  you  get  output. For  the  feedback  pass, normally,  you  have  a  sensor  to  measure  this. If  you  have  unit  feedback, this  feedback  is  just  a  unit  gain. The  output  is  the  same as  this  measurement  here. Of  course,  this  cont  the  system  we  design. Basically  for  continuous time  controle  system, you  are  funding  a  transfer  function, DS  as  contoler. That's  the  system  you  want  to  design. How  do  we  design  this  system? As  I  said,  we  must  have  the  plan  given  Yeah, you  can  use  physical  laws to  fund  the  transfer  function. In  nowadays,  you  can  use data  dave  approach  to  fund  the  model. Of  course,  you  must  have a  set  of  specifications. Now  this,  you  want  the  system to  behave  as  required. What  specifications  do  we  have? First  requirement  is  a  stability. You  want  to  design  this  controller to  ensure  your  system  is  stable. That's  a  essential  requirement,  stability. If  your  system  is  unstable, then  your  system  is  not  working. What  does  this  mean  for  stability? Yeah, we  have  several  definitions  for  stability. But  for  linear  system, all  the  definitions  are  equivalent. Basically,  it  means  your  system should  ensure  all  the  signals. Yeah,  you  have  signals  in  the  system. To  be  bonded,  cannot  diverge. Yeah.  For  example,  you  have  signal  UT, that's  the  input,  that's  the  output, and  they  have  ero  signal. Yeah,  those  signals  should  be  bonded. If  one  of  the  signals  go  to infinity,  then  it's  unstable. That's  the  first  requirement. Yeah,  we  have  a  fb  system. When  you  have  system, stability  is  issue  to  be  addressed. That's  an  essential  requirement when  you  design  your  controller. First,  you  have  to  ensure  stability. That  is,  when  you  design  this  DS, you  have  to  check  whether the  system  is  stable  or. That's  a  topic  we  will  study  also. How  do  we  check  stability? That's  the  first  requirement. Second  requirement  is  a  tent  performance. Yeah.  This  is  a  figure showing  the  output  response. Actually,  the  specifications  or performance  can  be  divided  into  two  parts, Twand  response, which  will  give  you  tent  performance, and  the  St  stated  performance. That  is  one  time  go  to  infinity. Then  whether  your  output, whether  this  output, converge  to  the  input  or  not. That's  the  S  state  performance, which  is  one  time  go  to  infinity. Actually,  you  studied  this  type  of performance  in  circuit  analysis. When  you  charge  RC  circate, you  have  time  constant, then  you  have  rise  time. I  R  LC  cycate, you  may  have  overshoot  also. It's  a  second  order  system, you  have  overshoot,  you have  rice  time,  settling  time. Yeah,  those  are  trans  performance. That  is  an  indication of  how  fast  your  response  is, or  how  stable  your  system  is. Yeah,  First,  you  have  to  ensure  stability. But  when  this  system  is  stable, maybe  some  case  you  have  more  stable  system. Some  cases  you  have  a  less  stable  system. Yeah.  That  already indicated  by  this  overshoot. If  you  have  a  knowledge  overshoot, then  your  system  is  stable. Be  you  want  this  output to  follow  this  reference. Sometimes  this  overshoot  the  reference. Yeah,  especially  when  you  have  a  ledge  gain, you  have  a  knowledge  overshoot. This  is  performance.  Yeah. We  have  two  types  of  performance,  t, and  the  Ste  state  tracking  accuracy. That  is  how  accurate  your  system  is. Our  ideal  case  is  the  output, follow  this  reference  in  the  end. That  means  this  ero  approach  to  zero. That's  the  steed  state  performance. In  some  case,  You may  consider  optimal  control. In  this  case,  you  have  a  cost  function  given. So,  in  many  cases, you  may  have  many  controls that  can  achieve  this  performance. While  this  performance  can  be  achieved, maybe  you  choose  one  of  them, which  give  you  the  best  control in  terms  of  the  minimum  cost. You  have  optimal  control  consider. Yeah,  Ply  will  consider optimal  control  in  his  part. This  is  how  we  designed  the  controller. Basically,  Our  task  of studying  control  system  will  be  two  parts. First  part  is  to  design  controller. In  this  case,  this  is  given, the  system  to  be  given sometime  you  call  this  system  as  plant. Specification  are  also  given. Based  on  specification, stability  requirement, or  sometime  optimal  performance  index, you  have  to  find  the  controller. That's  design. Yeah.  After  you  finish  your  design, you  have  to  do  verification  with  you. Now  this,  you  have  to  check  whether your  design  controller  beat the  requirement  or  not. Yeah,  this  part  is  called  analysis. So  we  have  design  and the  analysis  for  control  system. When  we  study  control  system, we  have  two  major  tasks, design  and  the  analysis. Okay,  analysis  after  you do  the  design,  after  you  get  this  D, you  have  to  study  the  overall  system to  check  stability, and  performance,  and  S state  performance  and  so  on. That  are the  two  essential  task  we  will  consider. This  is  about, not  necessarily  continuous  time  system. For  any  control  system, we  have  such  two  tasks. Now,  if  your  controller  is  implemented, Using  unlogged  devices, such  as  resistors,  capacitors, inductors,  and  operational  amplifiers, together  with  some  necessary mechanical  components. Then  your  system  is  continuous  time  system. That  is  all  the  signals  in the  system  will  be  continuous  time. That  is  UT,  YT,  ero  signal, the  sensor  output  all  continuous  time. This  is  continuous  time  system. Now,  there are  some  advantages  for  such  system. This  device  may  be  expensive  or  not  durable. We  have  to  find alternative  ways  to  implement  this  cont. Now  is  to  implement this  designed  consul.  How  do  we  do  that? We  can  use  computer  to  do  implementation. In  this  case,  we  have  this  broke  diagram. This  is  a  computer  controlled  system or  discrete  time  control  system. This  plant  is  still  the  same  as  this. That  is  the  system  to be  controlled,  is  unchanged. If  it's  a  Dot  then, here  is  still  and  this  is  also  DC  moot. The  any  difference  is  the  controller  part. We  want  to  implement  this  controller using  computer  or  digital  device. Our  computer  can  operate  on  digital  signals. In  this  case,  you'll  have analog  to  digital  conversion. Continuous  signal,  convert  to  digital  signal. Then  your  computer  this  digital  signals. Actually,  in  this  case,  your  computer  is just  to do  a  programming  to implement  this  controller. It's  a  programming  to  operate  on  this  signal, and  then  you  have  this  contro  signal  tent. But  this  output  from the  computer  is  still  digital. In  this  case,  you  have  to  convert this  digital  signal  to continuous  time  signal. You  have  a  DSC  and  the  zero  or hood  to  get  this  continuous  time  signal. This  is  our  computer  control  system or  discrete  time  control  system. This  means  our  controller here  operates  in  discrete  time. But  the  plant  or  the  system to  be  controlled  is still  operating  in  continuous  time. This  is  more  complicated  in  design  and analysis  because  you  have both  types  of  signals. Now  they  are  discrete  time  signal or  continuous  time  signal. Whereas,  for  this  continuous  time  signal, continuous  time  control  system, all  signals  are  continuous  time. The  design  and  analysis will  be  simpner  than  this. You  have  to  consider  ADC, DC,  and  so  one. Actually,  this  is  a  simplified  broke  diagram. For  more  complicated  ones, you  have  quantization. This  is  introduction  about discrete  time  control  systems. Of  course,  for  this  case, you  have  some  advantages. For  example,  our  computer implementation  will  be  cheaper. Yeah,  I  put  this  diagram  here  back. You  just  do  a  programming. The  implementation  is  cheaper  and  easier. Yeah.  Even  if  you have  more  complicated  control  algorithms, you  just  do  a  programming. For  example,  nowadays,  you have  adapt  control  algorithms, non  linear  control  algorithms, AI  algorithms  also. It's  hard  to  use analog  device  to implement  such  control  schemes. Then  if  you  use  a  computer, you  just  write  a  few  line  of  programs. The  implementation  is  easier. And  you  can  also  reprogram your  contro  schemes. Later  on  you  want  to  change your  contro  resels. Then  you  just  rewrite  a  program. Whereas  for  under  control  system, when  this  DS  is  changed, then  you  have  to  use  different  device. Except  when  you  change  the  parameter. Sometimes  you  have  to  change  the  gorithm  as. For  example,  the  simple  case  is  P  cons. But  later  you  want  to  have  PID  cont, then  you  have  to  change  this  device. But  in  our  case,  if  you change  the  control  algorithm, you  just  do  reprogramming. That's  easy.  Actually,  for the  same  processor, you  can  have  different control  schemes  implemented. In  this  case,  maybe  you have  multi  output  system. That  means  you  may  have more  than  one  controller  to  be  implemented. Then  you  just  do  program  with a  several  different  programs in  the  same  processor. There  are  lots  of  advantages. That's  a  introduction  about our  computer  control  system, which  are  to  be  started  in  this  course. Now,  as  I  just  mentioned, for  our  computer  system, we  have  signals  involved. Yeah,  we  have  contro  signal, output  the  signal,  aero  signal,  and  so. Now,  I  will  classify the  types  of  signals  to  be  considered. First,  you  should  know  what  is  signal. Signal  is  just  a  physical  quantity that  varies  as  a  function of  our  independent  variable. For  example,  temperature. The  temperature  can  change  with  time. This  time  is  a  independent  variable. But  sometimes  the  independent variable  can  be  space. For  example,  the  temperature  here  may be  different  from the  temperature  at  the  back. Yeah.  But  in  our  course, we  will  consider  time as  a  independent  variable. If  you  want  to  study  more  advanced  control, that  in  case  you  have more  than  one  variable  is  more  complicated. Now,  what  is  the  continuous  time  signal? In  this  diagram,  this  UT and  the  Y  t  will  be  continuous  time  signals. Because  their  time  is  continuous. It's  called  continuous  time  signal. Over  a  continuous  range  of  time, will  be  continuous  time  signal. This  is  the  keyword, continuous  range  of  time. But  the  ampitude  can  be continuous  or  can  be  discrete. For  example,  like  this. Yeah,  this  is  a  signal x  t.  T  is  a  continuous. X  is  the  amplitude  or  is  the  function. This  function  is  also  continuous. In  this  case,  we  have  a  name  for this  is  called  algo  signal. That  means,  this  type  of signal  is  continuous  both in  time  and  the  ampitude. Yeah,  as  I  just  mentioned, the  empty  can  be  discrete. For  example,  a  tase  de  signal. Yeah,  this  is  a  tase  de  signal. In  this  case,  your  signal  x  t can  take  some  values. For  example,  the  number of  students  in  this  LT, can  it  be  integer,  cannot  be  decimal. You  cannot  say  0.5  student. This  is  a  quanti  signal. But  the  time,  you  see this  t  is  still  continuous. For  continuous  time  signal, the  function  itself  can  be continuous  or  non  continuous  like  this. In  fact,  in  our  conto  system, we  have  a  taste  signal or  called  unit  function. That  is  a  continuous  time  signal if  it  is  continuous. But  the  unit  state  function,  there  is  a  jump. The  ampitude  is  not  necessarily  continuous. In  many  cases,  we  just  use continuous  time  in  e  of underlo  even  the  load  exactly  the  same. Yeah.  Actually,  there  is  a  difference between  erlock  signal and  continuous  time  signal. But  in  many  cases, we  treat  them  equally. But  if  you  really  want  to  difference  eight, these  two  signals,  this  is  the  difference. Nerlog  can  be  both continuous  in  time  and  the  ampitude. But  continuous  can have  discrete  time  ampitude. This  is  the  definition of  quantize  the  signal. How  do  we  obtain  the  quantize  the  signal? The  process  is  called  quantization. Yeah,  quantization  is  a  process. Now  this  to  change your  variable  to  our  set  of  distinct  values. For  example,  for  our  computer, to  do  calculation, this  EQ  should  be  quantized. You  have  a  certain  number  of  bits  involved. This  is  a  quantized  signal. But  in  our  course, we  don't  consider  quantization. Actually,  in  practice  in practical  computer  control  systems, you  have  quantizer  involved. Okay,  so  that's  a  continuous  time  signal. Now  we  have  discrete  time  signal. Discrete  time  signal is  the  independent  variable. T  is  context,  is  not  continuous. But  the  amplitude  can  also be  continuous  or  discrete. For  example,  this  sample the  data  signal  is  discrete  time  signal. You  can  see  that  the  time is  discrete,  is  not  continuous. But  the  ampue  the  ampitude is  continuous  because the  signal  is  obtained  by sampling  a  continuous  time  signal. This  ampitude  can  be  any  value. No  limitation  and  the  amplitude. Yeah,  this  is  a  periodically  sampled  signal. Not  that  means,  your  sampling  instance, t  k  can  be  represented as  k  times  t.  This  k  is a  integer  and  the  T  is a  fixed  constant,  called  sampling  period. For  example,  here,  one  k  zero, that's  a  this  t  zero  sampling  instant. Then  there  is  first  sampling  instant, second  sampling  instant  and  so  one. This  is  a  pi  periodic  sample because  t  is  a  fixed  constant. In  our  course,  we  will start  the  periodical  sampon. Yeah.  For  more  advanced  control  systems, you  can  have  non  perdical  sample. For  example,  nowadays,  if you  read  research  paper, you  can  find  the  so  called  event triggered  system. In  that  case,  you  sample your  signal  when certain  conditions  are  satisfied. You  get  a  periodic  sample  in  that  case. For  simplicity,  in  our  course, we  just  studied  puritical  sample. That's  sample  the  data  signal because  the  ampitude  can  be  any  value. But  we  also  have the  definition  of  digital  signals. These  are  the  signals  with a  discrete  time  and  the  ampitude. The  time  is  discrete  and the  ampitude  also  discrete. You  can  see  they  can only  take  certain  values. Is  quanti  value. Normally,  in practical  computer  controle  systems. We  first  do  sampan. After  you  do  sampan, you  have  to  do  quantization to  convert  the  sample the  data  signal  to  quantized  signal for  the  computer  here  to  do  process. This  is  a  the  two  types of  discrete  time  signes. In  summary,  we  have  discrete  time  signals  and the  continuous  time  signals for  computer  console  systems. As  I  said,  in  our  case, we  do  not  consider  quantization. We  treat  both  digital  signals  and  the  Sam the  signals  equally  as  discrete  time  signals. Here  is  an  example. This  is  more  than this  simplified  broke  diagram. You  can  see  you  have  the  you have  the  plant  to  be  controlled. This  is  the  input  to  the  plant. It's  continuous.  The  output  is  continuous. You  have  transducer  or  sensor. This  is  also  continuous. The  reference  is  normally continuous,  so  you  have  this  ar. This  ar  is  this  e,  that's  continuous  time. Then  you  have  samping, and  the  ization  to  convert this  continuous  time  signal to  digital  signals, binary  codes  like  this. This  is  a  digital  signal, then  digital  computer process  this  digital  signal, and  the  output  is  also  digital. Then  you  have  DA  converter. This  is  still  discrete  time  signal  because the  time  is  just convert  binary  maybe  to  decimal. The  discrete  time,  then  you  have  to  use a  whole  circuit  to  change this  discrete  time  signal  to  continuous  time. This  is  applied  to  actuator to  drive  or  to  control  the  plant. That's  typical  digital  control  system. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. We  consider  the  control  of DC  silver  system  through  a  computer. We  have  this  picture sewing  the  control  system  here. Yeah,  this  is  a  very  old  computer. Actually,  this  was  the  time when  I  did  my  PHET. At  that  time,  the  computer  is  like  this. We  have  this  A. We  have  the  motel  here. Yeah,  this  is  the  motor.  DC  mot. We  have  to  drive  the  mot  shaft. The  motor  is  the  rotting. We  have  to  control  the  position of  the  motor  shaft. The  output  in  this  case, is  the  angular  position. The  output  is  the  output  shaft  position. We  want  this  position  to  follow a  given  reference  Y  t.  That's  the  objective. We  have  to  design  contonas  to  achieve  this. To  illustrate  the  conto  performance. We  did  the  computer  simulation with  two  different  contons. And  the  reference  trajectory is  a  square  with. Now  this  is  the  Y  star  here. Yeah,  we  have  this  y  star. That's  the  reference  signal  is  a  square  with. This  is  the  response  with one  of  the  control  scheme. This  blue  nine  is the  reference.  That's  the  Y  star. Then  the  green  nine  is  the  actual  position. So  you  can  see  when  this  is  the  reference, c  change  from  one  to  net  one. Then  the  output,  which  is the  shaft  position  or  behave  like  this, and  eventually  it  will approach  to  the  reference. Then  at  this  time, the  output  or  the  desired  output is  changed  from  one  to  net  one. F  net  one  to  one.  Is  this  then the  output  position  be  like this  with  one  control  algorithm. If  we  revise  a  control  algorithm, revise  the  control  scheme, then  we  have  this  response. You  can  see  for  both  cases, the  system  are  stable because  there  is  no  divergence. Also  the  output  approach to  the  desired  reference at  the  st  state,  you  see  here? We  have  zero  speed  able  for  both  cases. However,  this  response  is better  than  this  because the  overshoot  here  is  smaller, more  stable, nothing  means  this  is  more  stable. This  is  more  otory. How  do  we  achieve  this  instead  of  this? That  is  the  course  to  be  started. We  have  to  design  suitable  contoners, based  on  the  specification. Actually,  you  are  given  the  specification, such  as  overshoot,  rise  time, and  so  on,  and  the  seeds  the  arrow. You  have  to  use  this  and also  the  given  plant  like  this  DC  motor. Based  on  this,  you  have  to  find a  suitable  consoler  to  achieve  such  results. This  is  about  the  introduction. Now,  to  do  the  design, as  I  said,  our  main  task. To  study  to  system  will be  design  and  analysis.  Two  major  task. To  do  this  two  task, we  need  some  fundamentals. The  first  fundamental  is  Z  trasf. Yeah,  I  believe  you  studied  the  nos. For  digital  systems, we  will  study  Z  transform, and  we  will  use  Z  transform  to  do  modeling, you  see  here,  you  have to  fund  the  transfer  function. Yeah.  You  have  to  model this  system  to  the  modeling, and  also  to  design  the  controler. This  part  is  a  control  gorith  to  be  designed. If  you  consider  Z  transform,  later  on, when  you  do  modeling, this  transfer  function  is a  pulse  transfer  function in  terms  of  z  transform. And  this  contoner  design is  also  pulse  transfer  function in  terms  of  z  transform. This  transform  is  a fundamental  tool  to  be  used. Now  in  this  chapter, we  will  study  the  following  topics. Yeah,  of  course,  I  give you  a  short  introduction, maybe  just  half  minutes. Then  I  give  you the  definition  of  z  transform. Then  I  will  consider the  z  transform  of a  few  elementary  functions. And  the  I  will  establish some  important  properties  and the  serims  of  Z  transfer. Of  course,  we  have  inverse  this  transform, and  we  finally  apply these  transform  measures to  solve  difference  equations. In  fact,  one  application of  plus  transform  is to  solve  differential  equations. That's  in  time  and  continuous  time, you  have  differential  equation. In  discrete  time  domain, you  will  have  difference  equation. These  are  the  topics  to  be studied  in  this  Chapter  two. Today,  I  think  I  will  go  through the  four  topics  and the  part  of  this  inverse  Z  transform. Just  now,  I  said  Z  transform is  a  mathematic  tool  for the  analysis  and  the  design of  discrete  time  control  systems. That's  Yeah,  that's  why  we  need to  study  this  transform because  it's  a  mathematical  tool. Just  like  nop  tansfm  is an  important  tool  for  us  to study  continuous  time  control  system. Yeah.  O  Z  transform will  difference  equation to  Augie  brocha  equations. Just  like  Naples,  nonsfm  will convert  differential  equation to  algebra  equation. Now,  I  already  mentioned a  discrete  time  signals. If  you  have  a  continuous  time  signal x  t,  you  do  sam  pony, you'll  have  this  sequence, x  zero,  x  d, x2t,  x  kt  and  so  on. K  is  an  integer. In  this  case,  for  discrete  signal, k  will  be  independent  variable. This  t  is  the  sampling  period. Yes.  Sometimes  we just  consider  number  sequence without  this  t.  You have  this  just  number  sequence  x  zero, x  one,  x  two,  x  and  so  one. Our  zsform  will  be  defined  by using  the  discrete  time  signal or  number  sequence. I  give  you  the  formal  definition  of  z  ts. This  is  the  definition  of z  transform  for  continuous  time  signal. This  this  transform  is also  applicable  to  continuous  time  signal. Xt  is  in  fact  a  continuous  time  signal. But  you  have  to  sample  this  x  t  to  get  x t.  Even  though  xt  is  a  continuous  time, you  just  need  to  use  the  sampled  values. In  this  case,  this  is  x t  and  this  is  atation  for  the  z  transform  x, and  this  is  deloted  as  x  z, which  is  calculated  by  using  this  formula. It's  x  k  times  p  k, four  k  from  zero  to  infinity,  added  to  gz. If  you  do  this  addition  in  the  end, this  is  a  function  of  z, and  this  z  is  a  complex  variable. That's  the  definition.  Basically,  you have  two  different  representations for  the  same  signal. Yeah,  this  is  time  representation, actually  is  continuous  continuous  time. If  you  sample  it,  you  get  discrete  time  KT. This  KT  is  represented  in  time  domain. With  k  as  an  independent  variable. If  you  consider  z  transform, it  will  convert  this  time  domain  signal  to  a z  C.  This  z  is  a  complex  variable. That's  the  definition.  You  just  use KT  to  do  this  calculation to  have  this  answer. Now,  if  we  just  have  a  sequence, then  you  don't  have  to  consider  this  cap  t, so  it's  this  definition. This  is  the  z  transform  for  our  course. Actually,  in  terms  of  mathematics, you  have  two  sized  z  transform. Our  course  is  just  one  sized  z  transform because  when  t  is  less  than  zero, we  treat  x  t  as  zero. In  mathematics,  you  have  this  definition. But  we  are  some  KT is  zero  for  negative  k.  We  just  have  this. This  is  the  definition. No.  Based  on  this  definition, I  will  fund  z  transforms  of  a  few  signals. Actually,  before  that,  you  can  also  do expansion  of  this  summation. If  you  do  expansion, this  is  the  same  as  this. This  is  a  compact representation  of  the  summation, and  this  is  a  expanded  version. In  fact,  from  this,  you  can  see that  the  coefficient  of  z2pk  is  T. This  is  in  fact the  inverse  transform  of  this  x  z.  X KT  is  the  inverse  z  transform corresponding  to  the  case  Sampan  instant. This  is  one  of  the  approach to  fund  the  inverse  transform. Later  on,  we  will  consider  this. Anyway,  this  is  just  the definition  of  z  transform. Now  let's  look  at  some  examples. First,  we  consider  the  z  transform of  unit  step  function. As  I  just  mentioned, our  z  transform  is not  just  for  discrete  time  signess, but  it  also  be applied  to  continuous  time  signess. This  unit  step  function is  a  continuous  time  signal  given  here. Yeah.  This  is  a  This is  the  definition  of  n  step. In  our  subject,  we  use one  t  to  date  uniste  function. I  think  in  mathematics. They  use  UT.  We  don't  use UT  because  our  UT  is  the  control  signal  here. To  avoid  confusion,  we  use  one  t. Two  d  lot  unit  state  function. This  is  the  definition,  and  this is  a  graph  for  the  unit  state  function, Ft  less  than  zero, that's  zero,  fort  b  one  is  one. This  is  a  continuous  time, and  the  xt  is  just  one, one  t  beg  zero. Now  let's  look  at  the  z  transform  of this  signal  by  using  the  definition  here. Two  fund  two  fund  z  transform. First,  you  have  to  do  sampling. If  you  sample  this  signal, you  will  have  this  x  KT. Yeah.  Because  this  xt  is  one  for  all  t  zero. One  k  t  will  also  be  one for  all  non  negative  integers. This  is  also  showing  in  the  graph. W  k  is  zero,  that's  one. W  k  is  t,  that's  one, that's  the  sample  value. W  k  is  two  t,  that's  also  one. O  t  is  the  continuous  time signal,  and  those  dots, those  dots  are  the  sample  values, which  will  give  you  one  k t.  That's  the  sample  of  the  value. Now,  we  calculate  z  transform by  using  this  definition  here. From  the  definition,  our  x  KT is  just  one  here. Not  the  mean  this  is  just  one. You  do  a  substitution. You  get  this  one  here. Then  times  z  net k.  K  is  from  zero  to  infinity. One  time  z  k  same  as  z  ne k.  This  is  same as  this  after  you  do  expansion. Yeah  W  k  zero, that's  one,  W  k  one,  that's  z  inverse. When  is  two,  you have  z  inverse  square  and  so  one. Then  this  can  be found  as  1/1  minor  z  inverse. You  know  why?  Because  the  inverse  square, and  so  one  is  a  geometric  sequence. The  studying  term  is  one, so  that's  one  here. And  the  common  ratio, is  just  the  z  inverse. This  is  the  common  ratio. You  have  this.  That's  the  summation, and  you  multiply  z in  both  numerator  and de  normal  liter,  you  get  this. That's  the  z  transform  of  unit  function. Actually,  to  get  this,  you  have  a  condition. That  is  this  magnitude, should  be  less  than  one. That  is  the  common ratio  should  be  less  than  one. This  is  required  in  signal  process. But  in  our  control  system, we  don't  use  this  condition. Because  in  our  control  system, when  we  design  our  controler, we  should  ensure  stability. If  you  can  ensure the  stability  of  the  system, this  condition  will be  automatically  satisfied. But  if  you  consider  signal  processing, in  that  case,  you  don't  design  consona. You  need  this  condition  to  be  satisfied. In  our  consol  system, we  will  design  consular to  make  this  satisfied. That's  why  we  have an  essential  requirement for  our  consol  system. In  the  future  part  of  this  course, I  don't  use  this  condition. This  condition  as  I  said is  insured  by  stability. If  your  system  is  unstable, then  you  have  divergence, then  this  cannot  be  done. That's  the  z  ones  form  of  the  unit  function. Now,  let's  consider  another  typical  signal called  unit  ramp  function. This  is  the  definition  of  unit  ramp. Wt  is  a  negative,  x  t  zero, W  is  B  gran  zero  t.  If  you  do, graphically,  this  is  a  strain, starting  from  the  origin. It's  like  this  for  continuous  time  signal. It's  a  would  be  a  strain, starting  from  the  origin, gradient  is  one, because  this  gradient  is  one. That's  the  continuous  time  signal. Now  you  do  samp. Get  x  t,  x2t, x3t,  and  x  40. X  KT  is  just  the k.  You  just  change  this  mot  to  k t.  You  have  this  x  k  t.  That's the  sample  the  value  F  k from  zero  to  infinity. You  see  k  is  zero,  that's  this. W  K  is  one,  that's  just  t. Hello?  I'm  I'm  here  cross.  Okay,  sorry. That's  the  sample  the  values. Then  we  use  this  definition. We  can  find  Z  for  this  function. X  Z  is  the  z  transform  of  t. This  is  the  unit  ramp,  and they  use  the  definition, we  change  XK  t  to  KT. Because  our  KT  is  K. And  this  t  is  constant, so  you  can  move  this  out. You  have  this.  Then  you do  a  suuation  of  this. Or  you  to  expansion,  you  get  this, and  this  summation  is  basically  to  that. That's  the  zs  form  for  ramp  function. This  sform  is  depend  on  t  as  you  can  see. In  general,  your  sf is  depending,  the  sampling  period. But  if  you  just  consider  number  sequence, number  sequence,  you  just use  this  definition  here. In  this  case,  you  don't  have  t  involved. You  don't  have  this  t  involved. In  this  case,  you  get  this  zs. This  is  just  equal  one  in  this  case. That's  unit  ramp. And  we  have  polynomial  function, which  is  a  number  sequence. This  is  the  definition  of polynomial  function  in  our  context. Yeah.  Maybe  it's  different  from the  polynomial  defined  in  mathematics. Actually  just  eight  k.  A  is  a  constant. Yeah,  this  is  just  a  constant. You  use  the  definition  here. You  can  find  the  z  transform  of  K. You  just  do  a  substitution. X  k  is  changed  to  eight  for  k. You  can  combine  this  two  together and  move  this  index  k  out. You  get  this  A  Z  inverse  k. This  can  be  expanded  into  this. Again,  this  is  the  summation  of a  geometric  sequence  with the  ratio,  A  Z  inverse. This  is  one  is  from  this  first  term, divided  by  one  mans  the  common  ratio. That's  the  Z  transform  for  this, for  this  polynomial  function. Now  we  have  exponential  function. Yeah,  this  is  the  exponential  function. E  to  A. This  A  is  also  constant. Now,  you  do  sample. You  get  x  KT, just  change  this  t  to  K.  This  t  to  K, this  K  is  a  known  netive  integer. You  use  the  definition  in  2.1. This  is  the  definition  in  2.1. You  substitute  this  two  here. You  have  this. Again,  you  move  this  k  out  as  we  did  here. This  is  neg  80  times  z  inverse. Then  this  summation  will be  equal  this  because  the  first  term, one  k  is  zero,  that's  one. And  the  common  ratio  is 80  times  z  inverse.  You  have  this. Which  is  the  same  as  this.  You  multiply  the in  both  numeral  and  denormator  have  that. Actually,  if  you  define  this  net  as  B, you  can  use  this  result  also. Yeah  because  this  net  Ak  t  can  be  written  as net  A  t  to  p  k.  And  this  is  B,  so  it's  Bk. Then  you  can  use  this  result to  have  the  answer. That's  exponential  function. Now,  We  have  sin  solid  function. For  example,  this  sine Omega  t,  fort  big  zero. Win  is  negative,  is  zero. How  do  we  find  this  z  transform? Can  we  still  use  the  definition  here? Of  course,  when  you  do  Sampan, you  will  have  x  T  as  in  O M  K.  Change  this  to  KT.  You  have  this. Now  you  subtitue  this  to  the  function  here. Can  we  find  the  salvation  easily. Like,  what  we  did  earlier. It's  so  easy. I  will  come  back  after  a  break. We  have  20  minutes  break. You  come  back  at  around  8:00  P.M. Okay. Okay,  Let's  start  again.  Yeah,  no. How  do  we  find  the  trans  for  sing? If  you  directly  use  the  definition, it's  very  hard  to  compute  the  summation. Yeah  I  replace  x  KT  by  sine  Omega  t. I  don't  think  it  is simple  to  compute  the  final  result. How  do  we  find  the  result for  the  z  transform  of  sine  Omega  t? We  will  use  this  exponential  function.  Yeah. This  function  has di  z  transform  obtained  just  now. If  you  recall,  the  ON  formula. Sine  Omega  t  can  be  written  as G  Omega  t  e  to  prot  G  amiga,  Basically, I  think  we  have  this  We have  this  enough  formula. E,  for  example,  alpha equals  cosine  alpha  plus  sine  alpha. And  the  negative  alpha  equina  mas  sin  Apha. To  get  the  sin  pha, you  just  subject  the  first  identity, by  this  second  identity. This  minors  this,  you  get  twice of  two  times  g  times  the  son  alpha. Son  Alpha  or  b  1/2  g, E  alphas  elect  to  alpha. Okay? This  formula  can  be  applied  here  with our  alpha  B  Omega  t. This  Omega  t  is  our  alpha. Now,  base  this  result. Yeah,  that  is  the  result  we  just  obtain. We  can  have  disease transform  for  this  function. Rap  disease  transform  of  this  right  site. Replace  sine  megat  Now, we  have  a  important  property  for  z  transform. That  is  the  ninear  property. Later  on,  I  will show  you  the  linear  property. Actually,  the  linear  property  can  be proved  by  using the  definition  of  z  transform. Ninear  property  means  the  z  transform  of this  subtraction  divided  by this  constant  or  equ  to  this. You  just  move  the  constant out.  You  have  this. Then  this  z  or  qu  to  the  Yeah, the  z  transform  of  this  difference is  to  the  difference  of  this  two  z  transform. This  is  the  ninear  property  of  z  transform. This  one,  this  z  transform can  be  found  from  here. Omega  t  is  actually, this  A,  you  have  net  A. This  A  is  just  same  as  negative  j  omega. For  this,  R  A  is  just  the  J  Omega. You  change  this  A  respectively. You  have  these  two  terms. Yeah,  this  A,  for  the  first  term, this  or  this  negative  A  is  J  Omega. For  the  second  term,  this  A  is  just  the  mgal, so  it's  a  negative  j  megalit  here. It's  just  a  direct  application  of this  result  to  obtain  this  two  terms. Now,  you  do  subtraction  of  two  terms. You  have  this  result.  Yeah,  this is  a  f  subtraction. You  have  a  common  denominator  by multiplying  this  two  denominators. Then  for  the  first  term, you  have  to  multiply  this  denominator. For  the  second  term,  you have  to  multiply  this  denominator. In  the  numerator  here, you  have  to  do  this. This  manors  this. One  is  canceled  out. What  you  have  is the  second  term  this  first  term Bic  become  positive. The  first  term  and the  z  inverse  is  moved  out. We  have  this.  For  the  denominator, you  do  a  multiplication. We  have  this  three  terms. For  the  first  term  is  just  one  times  one. For  the  second  term  is the  coefficient  of  z  inverse. This  one  times  one plus  one  times  nextive  of  this. Minors  the  summation  of  these  two  terms. And  this  second  term  time  the  second  term, will  you  view  z  inverse  square. This  multiply  with  this. This  time  this  is  one. Inverse  times  inverse, you  get  z  inverse  square. Now,  What  is  this  subjection? You  use  this  answer  again,  this  result. So  this  mads  this or  be  two  g  times  sine  Omega  t. T  g  comes  out  with  this  two. You  have  sine  Omega  t  here, and  they  have  z  inverse, that's  the  inverse  copied  here. That's  the  numerator.  This  minders this  or  be  two  sine  Omega  t. For  the  denominator,  you  just  simplify  the  b. This  plus  this  answer. Use  this  again.  If  u  plus  this  two, you  have  two  arson  if. This  plus  this  is  two  son  artifa. Therefore,  this  plus  this  is  two son  amiga  t.  Yeah. Yeah.  This  plus  this  is  two  son  va. So  this  plus  this  is  two.  Okay. So  that's  this  and the  That's  the  z  transform  for  this  sun  got. Now,  you  can  multiply z  square  in  both  numerator  and  denominator to  have  the  z  transform in  terms  of  z  or  positive  z  powers. That's  the  Mr.  To fund  the  z  transform  for  sine  omega. Now  for  cosine  omega  t,  you  do  the  same. Yeah,  because  cosine  omega t  according  to  this in  the  former  era  omega plus  2:00  P.M.  Necrog  mega  divide  by  two. You  use  near  property, half  is  moved  out. Then  inside  the  bracket, you  have  z  transform  of  J  Omega  t plus  the  z  transform  of  negative  Omega  t. U  apply  this  form  again, these  two  terms,  respectively, you  and  the  simplify,  have  this  answer. That's  the  z  transform  for  cosin  agot. Now,  let's  look  at  some  examples. Yeah.  This  is  nos  given. And  you  want  to  find  the  z  transform, corresponding  to  this  Nplans  form. What  do  we  do  is  to  find the  time  domain  signal  from  the  given  no. You  take  a  inverse  nop,  you  have  this  answer. I  believe  you  know  how  to find  the  inverse  nonpros. This  will  give  you  x  t  like  this. Now,  the  form  of  this  time  function, or  b  e  to  the  z  transform  of ones  the  z  transform  e  negative t.  We  note  the  transform, which  one  is  the  unit  function. For  the  exponential  function, we  have  this  z  transform  here. We  get  these  two  terms. This  unit  function, give  you  this  z  transform, then  matters  this  term  with  our  A  as  one, this  A  here,  is  one. You  get  this.  Then  you simplify,  you  get  this  answer. In  terms  of  z,  you  get  this. That's  the  z  transform  corresponding to  the  given  no  pro  transform. Okay. In  our  final  exam, this  table  is  given. Unless  required  specifically, you  can  use  this  Z  transform  table to  find  your  Z  transform. Specifically  means,  for  example, find  a  di  z  transform based  on  the  definition. In  that  case,  you  cannot  use  the  table. Without  such  requirement, you  can  use  the  table. But  you  should  know  how  to  use  the  table. For  example,  the  z  transform of  this  function  is  one. Yeah,  this  is  called the  irtal  function  or impulse  in  discrete  domain. This  is  a  unsep  function. This  is  the  expial  function,  in  there. This  is  a  ramp.  This  is a  cineration  function,  square. For  this  con  is  no  transform. There  is  a  condition  here stated  at  the  end  of  the  table. That  is,  your  x  t  is  zero  for  negative  t, or  x  is  zero  for  k  zero. For  all  disse  transforms. Showing  here,  the  corresponding  in corresponding  K  should  be  mentioned  here. In  fact,  for  this  third  line here  is  any  applicable  to  this  case. In  this  case,  K  is  one,  two, three,  for  this  case. For  other  cases,  K  is  01, two,  three  and  seven. This  is  a  z  transform  table. Next,  we  consider  some  important  properties and  the  c  reams  of  the  z  transform. Assume  the  z  transform  of  x  t  is  x  z. Then  we  have  this  property called  multiplication  by  constant. In  fact,  just  now  we  used  this  rest. You  see  here,  this is  multiplied  by  a  constant. For  this  function  multiply  this  constant. This  constant  is  moved  out. Yeah. This  is  the  property  here. You  have  a  times  t. Then  the  z  transform  of  this  product  is just  a  times  the  z  transform  of  xt. In  other  words,  this  A  can  be  moved  out. We  use  this  it's  A  x  z. You  can  prove  this  easily  by  using the  definition  of  z  transform  here. If  you  multiply  A  here, this  A,  they  have  A  here, so  this  A  can  moved  out. Okay? Yeah.  C  property  is  linear  property. Yeah,  as  I  just  mentioned, I  also  used  this  property  here. If  you  have  two  constant  R  Beta. You  are  looking  for  the  s  form of  this  linear  combination, R  f  plus  beta  g. The  result  is  Ra  times  z  plus  Beta  times  g. Which  was  used  here?  You  see? This  is  linear  property. Again,  if  we  want  to  do  a  proof, you  just  use  the  definition. Yeah.  This  definition  will give  you  the  linear  property. If  you  consider  multulpplication  by  e  over  k, k  is  the  non  negative  integer, which  is  a  independent  variable. Then  the  z  transform  of  this  A k  time  x  k  will  be  e  to  this. Of  course,  your  x  z  is  the  z  transform  of  x k.  This  x  is  the  z  transform  of  this. In  other  words,  you  just  change  this  z  to A  inverse.  You  have  the  answer. Again,  you  can  prove  this  by  the  definition. Yeah,  you  just  consider this  definition because  this  is  a  number  sequence. Based  on  that  definition, the  z  transform  of  k  x  k  will  be  ak  x  k  here. Then  time  z  two  network  from  the  definition. This  k  can  be combined  with  the  z  one  network. We  have  x  k  time  this. If  you  work  out  the  sm, the  answer  of  this, the  z  transform  of  x  k  will  be  x  z. But  now  z  is  changed  to  this. We  have  this  answer. That's  how  we  do  the  proof. Next,  we  have  an  important  theorem called  shifting  or  translation  theorem. Assume  your  x  t  is  zero  for  negative  t, and  this  signal  is a  sample  with  a  sampling  period t.  The  z  transform  of  this  signal  is. This  is  a  the  condition or  notation  for  the  z  transform  of  x  t. Now,  for  no  negative  integer  n, the  z  transform  of  xt  minus  n  t  or z  netal  n  x.  Yeah, actually  this  is  a  function delayed  by  n  sampling  period, n  is  no  netive  integer  here. You  can  see  that.  Multiplication  by z  inverse  is  equivalent to  delaying  one  step  in  time. Yeah.  That  means  if  your  n  is  one, you  have  x  tit. The  signal  is  delayed by  one  sample  in  purity. The  corresponding  z  transform is  just  z  inverse  Z. In  the  future,  you  can  see  that  if your  multiplies  by  z  inverse, the  corresponding  inverse  z transform  or  be  delayed  by  one  sample. That's  the  meaning. Multiplication  by  z  inverse  is equivalent  to  delaying  one  step  in  time. Yeah,  this  is  an  important  way to  implement  our  digital  cons. We  will  consider  this  in the  implementation  part. This  is  for  delay. Now,  in  some  cases, you  have  advanced  like  this. Your  signal  x  t  is  advanced  by n  that's  en  sampling  purity. In  this  case,  the corresponding  z  transform  will be  equal  to  this. It's  more  complicated  than  this. Here,  you  just  have  one. But  this  one,  you have  to  do  subtraction  here. Yeah,  you  have  this  subject, x  T  zero  net  to  K, add  together  for  k  from  zero  to  n  minus  one. Yeah,  this  n  is  the  integer  given  here. That  is  this  n.  Okay? Now,  from  this  result, you  can  see  multiply  by  z  is equivalent  to  advance  one  step  in  time. B  n  equals  one, you  have  z  one,  z  time  x  z. Of  course,  here,  you have  a  initial  condition  here. W  k  is  zero,  that's  one, then  you  have  x  zero. If  it's  a  zero  initial  condition, it's  equivalent  to  advance  one  step  in  time, because  this  n  is  one. Is  advanced  by  one  sample  in  per This  is  the  interpretation of  these  two  results.  We  have  two  results. One  is  for  delay, and  the  other  is  for  the  ones  in  time,  don't. This  right  side  is  the  z  transform. Now  let's  do  a  proof. We  prove  2.7  first. We  just  use  the  definition of  z  transform  given  here. The  zs  form  of  x  t  minus  and t  is  the  same  as  this  summation. You  just  change  sm two  k  t  to  get  the  sample  the  value. You  have  the  sample  this  signal. Smot  change  to  that according  to  the  definition  here. This  sm  change  to  this. Now  let's  do  a  calculation. This  is  the  same  as  this. Why  do  I  do  this? I  just  want  to  this  K  here to  match  k  n  by  adding  a  value  and  man  value. What's  the  value  is  n.  Yeah, I  just  want  to  match  the integer  in  the  bracket. Let  me  do  a  calculation  for  you. Basically,  this  k,  I want  to  change  this  k  to  negative  k  n, Because  here  is  k  minus n.  If  I  want  to  do  this  change, I  have  two  plus  n.  If  plus  n, you  have  to  man  to  keep this  to  be  the same  as  the  original  Zoelect  k. This  is  a  change  to  that. Yeah,  maybe  you  have  a  base.  Z  elect  k. This  first  term  is  keep  here. Then  second  term  here, minus  n  is  equivalent  to  z2tn. But  n  is  fixed  integer. Yeah,  this  n  is  fixed. Integer.  Two  nz1tn. Yeah,  this  is  the  same  as  z  two  negative k  minus  n  el  net  n. This  is  a  constant. When  you  consider  the  salvation  here. The  salvation  here  is with  respect  to  K  is  changing. This  is  moved  out  to  get  this. That's  the  first  calculation  we  need  to do  to  match  K  minus  and  here. You  see,  you  have  K  minus  and. After  we  do  this,  we are  going  to  do  variable  change. We  define  K  minus  n  as  a  new  variable  n. Yeah,  this  summation  is with  respect  to  K  K  is  variable. Just  like  when  we  do  integration, you  have  an  integral  variable. You  do  variable  change  for  the  summation  by letting  a  new  integer  k  as  k  minus  n. This  change  to  that. Yeah.  Of  course,  when you  do  the  variable  change, you  have  to  find  the newer  bond  and  the  upper  bond. You  see  here  k  is  from  zero  to  infinity. When  k  is  zero,  your  is  a  netive. W  k  is  infinite. Your  m  is  also  infinite. This  is  x  t.  Of  course, this  is  zero  for  negative m.  This  is  a  variable  change. Now,  we  have  to  use  this  result. X  t  is  zero  for  negative  t. This,  this  term  here. Can  be  split  into  two  parts. This  smation,  can  be  split  into Sigma  from  netive  n  to  netive  one. Of  course,  you  have  this  function  here, I  don't  have  to  write  that. This  second  part  is  from zero  to  infinity  for  them. Here. Now,  for  the  first  part, or  first  term  here, it  is  zero,  y  zero, B  is  a  negative. You  see. M  is  from  net  n  to  net  one. That's  a  negative.  For  negative, your  x  is  zero. Use  this. This  is  a  change  to  that. You  just  have  this  second  term lit  for  this  sation. What  is  this? This  is  the  same  as our  definition  of  the  z  tras  pom. Any  changes  the  variable  here. Our  case,  there  is  from  zero  to  infinity. Here  is  k  from  02  infinite,  is  the. This  is  our  z. Therefore,  this  result  is  proved. Yeah,  that's  the  proof  for  2.7. Now,  for  2.8,  we  will  do  the  proof  similarly, as  we  did  here. First,  we  have  to  match. First,  we  have  to  change  this  t  to  kT  and then  match  the  variables and  then  variable  change. For  2.8,  this  is  2.8. Here. The  z  transform  of this  function  is  obtained  by  definition. You  just  change  this  moot  to  k t.  You  are  using  some  of  the  values. Here  is  k  plus  n, K  t  plus  n  t. We  have  to  do  this  matching. Basically  you  have  to  n  and  then  plus n.  Then  when  you consider  the  z  p  n,  it  is  moved  out. Same  as  what  we  did  there. This  is  k  t  plus  n  t  and here  is  z  p  k  plus  n. Also  two  variable  change, we  let  k  plus  n  as  dw  integer  variable. This  summation  will  be  changed  to  this. This  term,  change  to  the  first  term. With  this  variable  change  will be  will  be  equal  to  this.  Y? Because  one  g  is  zero,  your  m  is  n, so  that's  equals  n.  W  k  is  infinite, your  or  be  infinity. K  t  plus  t  or  t,  k  plus  n  is. That's  the  result  for  this  smation. But  this  is  starting  from  n, which  is  different  from  the  definition  of  zs. To  match  this  definition, we  have  to  add  this  term. Now  this,  we  add  the  summation of  x  t  z  to net  to  m  for  n  from  zero  to  Mm  minus  one. At  the  same  time,  you  have  to  this  term. We  just  do  addition  and  subjection. With  this  addition,  you  can  combine the  first  two  terms  to match  the  cs  definition. Here's  from  zero  to  n  minus  one. Here  is  from  n  to  infinite. You  combine  this  two,  you  get  this. Of  course,  you  should  copy  this  one  here. This  is  our  z. This  is  from  the  definition. Then  you  get  this  answer. Yeah,  basically,  just  change  this  m2k, this  m2k,  is  m2k.  You  have  the  result. This  is  the  second  formula in  the  shifting  serm. If  x  is  a  number  sequence, we  don't  have  the  sampling  period  involved. Then  for  the  z  transform  of  xt  plus n,  it  will  be  this. Actually,  this  would  be  x  k  plus  n.  My  we make  a  correction because  the  number  sequence. Yeah,  so  this  should  be  X  K. We  don't  do  something.  It's  discrete already  because  the  number  sequence. This  is  the  same  as  this. You  multiply  zero  to each  of  these  two  terms. You  have  this  answer. Then  when  n  is  one, you  have  this  result,  n  is  one, that's  z,  x,  this  would  be  zero. You  just  have  x  zero  times  z  here. This  n  is  one. Two,  you  have  two  additional  term. For  general  case,  when  this  is  n, you  have  n  additional  term. This  depending  on  initial  values. Yeah,  just  like  par  transform, you  have  similar  properties for  the  z  transform. That's  the  shifting  value  theorem. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. You  want  to  find  this  ones  form  of one  t  minus  capacity. Yeah,  this  one  t  is  the  unit  function. One  t  minus  city  means  this  is  delayed. This  unit  step  function  is delayed  by  one  sampling  period. That's  the  first  function. For  the  second  function, The  unit  function  is delayed  by  four  sampling  period. This  is  the  graphic  representation of  this  function. We  want  the  d  z  transform of  these  two  functions. You  just  use  the  shifting  value  theorem. That's  given  2.7. Yeah,  this  is  a  delayed  version  for  this. For  the  first  case,  n  is  one. The  z  transform  of  this  first  function  is z  inverse  times  the  z  transform of  the  unit  state  function. The  z  for  this  unit  function is  1/1  under  z  inverse. That's  the  answer. For  the  second  function,  n  is  four. You  apply  the  formular  in  2.7  again. You  have  z  four  times  the  z  transform of  unit  sta  function,  which  is  zu  this. Now,  we  have  another  example. This  is  a  number  sequence. F  K  defined  in  this  way. W  K  is  negative  zero  is  zero. W  K  is  a  positive  integer,  one,  two,  three, and  so  one,  A  k  minus  one. You  have  to  find  the  z  transform  of this  sequence. You  can  consider  this  F  K as  AK  delayed  by  one  step. If  you  look  at  the  definition  of  A  K, four  k  b  going  in  zero, it  will  be  A  K,  four k  less  than  zero  that's  zero. With  this  definition,  your  F  K is  this  function  delayed  by  one  step. Then  you  apply  the  delay  sm. The  z  transform  this  is a  z  inverse  times  the  z  transform  of  A  K, and  we  know  the  z  transform  of A  K.  Which  is  1/100  e  z  inverse. Yeah,  we  ten  this  earlier. That's  the  result.  Okay?  Another  example. You  are  given  X  with  H  being  zero, one,  two,  three,  and  so  one. We  define  and  do  function, y  k  as  the  summation  of x  for  H  from  zero  to  k. Yeah,  this  is  similar  to  our  integration. Maybe  if  you  recall  integration For  example,  in  integration, you  have  maybe  x  t  from  zero  to  t. Then  you  have  this  y  t  defined  as  this. Yeah,  this  is  a  continuous  version in  integration. Then  for  discrete  version, this  is  summation,  similar  to  this. What  we're  going  to  do  is  to  fund the  z  transform  of  y  k  in terms  of  X  z.  Yeah, I  think  you  know  the  plus  transform  for  this. Remember  plus  for  y  t  in  terms  of the  nonpluss  you  have  this  result, y  equals  one  over  a,  x  is. Yeah  Np  transform  property. Now,  for  this,  we  have  similar  properties. How  do  we  find  the  z  transform  of  k? For  this  from  this  definition in  terms  of  x  z. This,  we  rewrite  y  k  in  this  form. Yeah,  this  is  the  definition  of K.  We  just  expand  this  two. Actually,  you  can  do  your  K  is just  zero  plus  x  one, plus  x  k  minus  one  and  plus  x  k. Yeah. This  is  our  y  k. Now,  how  about  this  terms, four  k  from  02k  minus  one, you  have  k  terms  here.  What's  this? This  is  actually  k  minus  one, This  can  be  written  as  these  two  terms, this  term  is  just  y  minus  one. And  the  no  term  here  is  just  x  k. We  have  this  equation y  k  equals  minus  one  plus  x  k, and  we  are  looking  for  y  z  in  terms  of  x  z. We  take  s  form  on both  sides  of  this  equation. We  will  have Y  here,  y  k will  give  you  y  z.  How  about  this? You  use  the  shifting  property. This  is  delayed  by  one  step. This  will  be  z  inverse  y  z. Of  course,  the  z  of  x  k  is  x  z  as  given  here. Ry  Z  or  e  to  this. You  just  solve  this  equation, you  have  this  z. You  can  see  this  1/1  minor  z  inverse is  our  integrator  in  tm, or  in  discrete  time  domain. That's  similar  to  this. You  have  an  integrator  in  time  domain, or  S  domain  that's  one  over  S.  In  Z  domain, integrator  is  1/1  under  the  inverse. Yeah,  we  will  consider  this  litter. That's  a  property  for  this  summation. Similar  to  the  nop  transform property  of  integrations. Next,  we  have  a  complex  translation  theorem. Now  this  z  transform  will  be  obtained as  x  z  times  E  A  t.  In  other  words, you  found  the  z  transform  x  t  as  x, then  you  just  change  the corresponding  z  to  this. You  have  the  z  transform  of this  function.  You  can  prove  this. This  is  the  function  given  here, and  you  can  see that  the  z  transform of  this  is  found  by  definition. You  sample  this  continuous  time  signal by  changing  t  to  t. This  t2k,  t2kt. You  combine  these  two  terms. You  will  have  this. You  move  dt  K  out. You  can  see  the  result  of  this  is just  the  z  transform of  x  k  t  with  change  to  this. Yeah. That's  how  we  do  the  proof. In  our  definition  of  z  transform,  Here's  z. This  will  give  you  x  C. Now,  this  z  is  changed  to  z  E  eight. You  just  do  corresponding change  in  your  answer. Actually,  you  can  also  prove this  using  alternative  method. You  have  this  signal sampled  to  have  this  sample  the  values, and  that's  equent  to  this. You  can  define  this  as  B. You  define  this  as  you define  net  to  eight  as  B. You  can  use  the  earlier  property, you  get  the  same  result,  he  here. Okay. This  is  a  important  theorem  also. You  can  use  the  theorem  to find  the  di  z  transform of  these  two  functions. We  have  f  z  transform  of  sine omega  t  and  also  cosin  omega  t. Now,  if  you  multiply  e  ne  eight  in  front, you  have  this  result  of  ten. You  find  the  dis  transform of  sine  omega  t  first. After  that,  you  change  your  z  to E.  According  to  our  theorem. The  z  transform  of  sine Omega  t  has  been  found  to  be  this. Then,  you  replace  every  z.  Yeah, you  have  Z  here. You  have  to  replace  of this  three  Z  by  Z  E  at. You  get  this  answer. Actually,  that's  also  given in  the  Z  transform  table. You  can  see  that  from  here. Yeah,  eight  sine  Omega  t will  give  you  this  z  transform. Similarly,  for  this  to  have  coma, you  can  use  the  z  transform  of  cosa. To  obtain  the  answer  by  this  substitution. Every,  you  have  three  z  here, you  have  to  change  all  of  them  to  z e  t.  Change  to  that, this  inverse,  this  is  the  inverse  square d.  Then  you  do  a  calculation,  it  will  be  d. Yeah,  that's  the  same  as  this  here. That's  translation  theorem. One  more  example  is two  f  the  z  transform of  t  times  E  next  to  eight. This  time  you  use  the  z  transform  of  t, you  can  get  the  answer. We  know  the  z  of  t  is this  function  of  ten  earlier. You  change  this  two  to z  e.  You  have  this  result. Another  important  result  is called  initial  value  serie. Assume  the  s  form  of  xt  is  x  z, and  the  limit  of  x  z, when  qu  to  infinity  exists. Then  this  limit  is  zero. If  you  want  to  find  the  initial  value  of  x, you  just  use  the  limit  here. How  do  we  prove  this? You  just  use  the  definition. Yeah,  this  is  the  definition of  z  transform.  Right? That's  the  expanded  version. When  they  go  to  infinite, this  term  c  zero, this  term  or  qu  to  zero, you  only  have  x  zero  lift. You  have  this  result. Yeah.  Because  when  you  take  a  mit, all  this  to  zero. You  just  have  x  zero. This  is  a  convenient  way to  check  the  correcties of  ones  form  you  determine. For  example,  You  have  this  x  z  given, and  you  want  to  find  x  zero. How  do  we  do  that?  You  don't  have  to take  inverse  ns  form  to  get  x  zero. You  just  take  the  limit  of  this, when  they  go  to  infinity.  This  is  the  s. X  zero  ismit  of  this  givens, when  they  go  to  infinity. Let's  look  at  the  numerator. When  they  go  to  infinity, the  numerator  will  go  to  zero. For  the  denominator,  this  one, the  second  ter  or  g20, one  minus  zero  is  one. Similarly  for  this,  that  c20, one  minus  zero  is  one. Therefore,  the  answer  is  zero. Zero  divide  by  one  is  zero. That's  the  x  zero. In,  you  can  also  verify  this. Earlier,  we  have  found the  z  transform  of  this  is the  z  transform  of  this  function. If  you  look  at  the  example  earlier, example  2.1,  you  can  see  that  when  t  is  zero, Your  x  zero  is  zero. This  is  the  initial  value  theorem. Next,  we  have  a  important  serum  also. Before  that,  we'll  give  you  the  definition  of poles  and  zeros  in  the  z  plan. Normally,  our  z  tsm or  be  a  regional  function  like  this. You  have  a  numerator  and denominator  with  the  order of  the  numerator  e to  the  order  of  the  denominator. You  can  factorize  the  numerator and  denominator  to  have  this  form. You  have  factors  for  the  numerator. You  have  n  factors  in  the  denominator. Of  course,  some  of these  numbers  Z  one,  two,  z, P  one,  p2pn,  may  be  complex  numbers. Yeah,  because  this  is  Nader  polynomial  for the  denominator,  it  has  roots. You  have  n  roots,  but some  of  these  roots  may  be  complex. In  this  case,  our  P  one,  P  two, P  n  are  called  the  pole  of  x  z. The  are  the  solutions  of  dz  equals  zero, the  roots  of the  polynomial  in  the  denominator. This  z  is  z  one, z  two  up  to  z  n  or  the  zero. They  are  the  solutions  of  nz  equal  zero. This  are  the  definition  of  poles  and  zeros. Now,  with  this,  we have  the  final  value  therem  given  here. Suppose  our  x  k  is  zero  for  negative  k, and  the  d  z  transform  of  x  is  x  z. Assume  all  the  poles  of  x  z  n  inside  the  unit circle  with  one  exception that  assemble  pole  is  at  z  equal  one. Then  x  infinite,  that  is  x  to  infinity. W  be  equ  to  the  limit of  this  one  maner  z  inverse  time  x, when  z  tends  to  one. This  is  a  very  important  theorem. As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning, one  of  the  property  for control  system  is  a  ste  state  performance. That  is  a  wt  go  to  infinity. Normally  we  want  to  detracting ero  to  approach  zero. Wt  go  to  infinity. That  is  one  K  go  to  infinity. To  find  such  steed  state  value, you  can  use  final  value  ser.  Yeah. This  is  an  important  way  to  fund this  accuracy  of  your  control  system. That  is  the  speed  state  performance. Why  do  we  have  this  condition? This  condition  is  to  ensure  the  limit  exist. If  this  condition  is  not  satisfied, your  x  K  has  no  limit. W  K  go  to  infinite. Yeah. Maybe  in  this  case,  your  right  side has  a  limit, but  the  left  side  may  not  have a  limit  if  the  condition given  here  is  not  satisfied. We  have  all  poles  inside  the  un  circle. What  is  un  circle.  Is  a  circle centered  at  the  region.  Readers  one. Yeah,  this  is  in  the  Z  plane. But  you  have  one  possible  exception. That  is  x  z  can have  a  simple  pole  at  z  equals  one. I  will  show  you  some  examples  of  this. Now  let's  do  a  proof. Of  course,  we  cannot  do anything  on  the  left  side. When  we  do  proof,  we  walk  on  the  right  side, and  we  show  the  right  side  is  z  to  this. Because  left  side  is  just  one  term, so  we  cannot  do  anything. We  consider  the  right  side. We  have  two  terms. One  is  Z,  which  is  defined  as  this. The  other  is  z  inverse  X  Z. The  z  inverse  x  z  is  in  fact the  z  transform  of  x  k  minus  one. This  is  the  result  of  shifting  value  serm. The  z  transform  of  x  k minus  one  is  defined  as  this. This  is  you  have  two  terms  on  the  right  side. Now  you  do  subtraction, because  here  is  the subtraction  of  these  two  terms. You  do  subtraction,  this  minors  this. You  will  have  basically x  Z  minors  z  inverse  Z. Yeah,  this  is  before  you  take  a  limit. Now,  I  put  this  term  here  for easy  reference  before  I move  to  the  next  page. Actually,  this  is  just  the  right  side before  we  take  a  limit. We  are  going  to  consider this  and  the  next  page. Now,  because  we  walk  on  the  right  side, the  right  side  should  take  a  limit. You  take  a  limit.  And  identity. This  is  the  me  for  this  left, W  tends  to  one,  and  this  is  exactly. After  we  take  a  mit  here, is  a  exactly  the  right  side  of  2.16. Now,  we  walk  on  the  left  side. If  go  to  one,  what's  this  term? This  go  to  one,  you  have  x  k  lift. Same  lift  this,  this  will  to  one. You  have  x  k  minus  one  lift. The  left  side  will  change  to  this. X  k  from  this  first  term, x  k  minus  one  from  the  second  term, and  both  the  salvation for  k  from  zero  to  infinite. You  can  combine  this  two  term  into  this  after you  take  the  limit  of  z  approaching  one. Now  you  do  expansion  of  this  smation. When  k  is  zero,  you have  x  zero  minus  x  net  one. When  case  one,  you will  have  x  one  minus  x  zero. Case  two,  you  have  this. Then  you  continue  until  equals  infinity. Now,  you  do  our  observation  of  the  additions. X  zero  is  canceled  out  with  this  x zero  in  the  next  bracket. X  one  is  canceled  out  with  this  x  one. What  do  we  have?  We  have  two  terms  left. One  term  is  this  cannot  be  canceled  out, the  no  term  cannot  be  consoled  out. What  is  the  no  term  X  infinity? We  have  these  two  terms. What's  the  value  here? Look  at  the  condition  here. X  k  is  zero  for  netive  k. Our  K  here  is  netive  one. That's  zero.  Therefore,  use  this  condition. We  have  x  infinity. This  is  x  infinity, that  is  this  x  infinity, which  is  the  same  as  this. This  is  how  we  prove  the  found  value  them. Now,  we  have  proved  this  results. Next,  we  make  some  discussions about  the  result. Yeah,  I  already  mentioned that  this  is  a  very  useful  result, which  means  you  can compute  the  limit  of  your  x  k. W  K  go  to  infinity without  finding  the  inverse. Yeah,  normally,  when  you  do analysis  of  your  designed  control  system, you  need  to  fund  the  accuracy of  your  control  system. This  this  final  value  serum  can  be used  to  fund  the  std  state  accuracy. So  This  is  a  useful  result. Of  course,  when  you  apply  the  result, you  have  to  be  careful. Now  this,  you  have  to  check the  conditions  of  the  serrem. There  are  two  important  cases, the  limit  does  not  exist. First,  if  you  have  unbounded  sequence, in  this  case,  your  x  k  will  go  to  infinity. No  means  in  this  case, your  system  is  unstable. If  we  have  an  unstable  system, you  cannot  apply  this  theorem  because your  this  K  may go  to  infinity  or  be  unbounded. Yeah,  I  can  show  you  some  of the  Z  transforms  given  in  the  table. Z  transform  table.  I  just  showed  you. Yeah.  Maybe  I  show  you  this  one. For  example,  for  this  function  here. What  is  the  pot  of  this  z  transform? If  we  make  the  zero  and  solve  the  equation, you  get  a  z  equals  net,  correct? T.  If  this  A  is  a  positive. If  A  is  a  positive, then  this  will  converge. Because  e  to  a  net. Then  this  magnitude  will  be  less  than  one. If  A  is  a  negative, for  example,  negative  one, you  get  the  e  of  t. If  that  is  negative, then  this  magnitude  will  be  bigger  than one.  I  will  diverge. That  is,  if  a  is  negative  one, That  means  this  is just  negative  netive  one  t,  which  is  e. Definitely  this  will  diverge. In  this  case,  if  this  A  is,  for  example, netive  one,  that  will  give negative  netive  one  is  e. E,  will  the  magnitude will  be  bigger  than  one. In  this  case,  the  condition of  final  value  theorem  is  not  satisfied. It  will  Even  though  you  can apply  this  serum  to  calculate  the  right  side, but  you  get  the  wrong  answer. For  example,  you  can  multiply one  mind  z  inverse  and  do  a  calculation. I  you  get  the  zero. W  i  tends  to  one. But  you  get  the  wrong  answer. If  A  is  negative, for  example,  negative  one. This  is  one  case.  Second  case, you  have  story  sequence. For  example,  sine  Omega  t. Just  now,  we  have  the  sine  Omega  t  found  in our  calculation,  like  this. Yeah.  This  is  the  sine  Omega  t. This  z  transform. If  you  compute  the  pole, by  solving  the  equation with  the  denometer  zero, you  found,  you  have  two  complex  poses, and  the  unit  circle. In  this  case,  the  condition  is  not  satisfied. Remember,  this  is  the  condition. All  poses  must  be  inside  with one  exception  equals  one. If  we  have  two  complex poses  and  the  unit  circle, that's  not  the  exception. Why  do  we  have  the  exception? This  is  because  when you  have  a  simple  pole  like  this. What's  the  pole  of  this?  Equals  one. It  is  a  simple  pole.  Simple  pole means  the  order  here  is  one. Then  this  is  the  inverse  of  that. That  is  corresponding  to  it  function. This  has  a  limit,  which  is  one. You  see  one  k  go  to  infinity, the  limit  of  this  function  is  one. This  function.  This  is  exception. However,  if  we  have a  second  water  pole  like  this, this  is  second  water, because  you  have  square  here. Then  your  final  value  theorem cannot  be  applied  because that's  not  a  sample  pole. This  is  allowed. This  is  not  allowed,  and  actually, this  is  also  not  allowed. This  third  order  pole  here. When  you  apply  the  final  value  theorem, you  have  to  ensure  the  conditions  satisfied. But  in  our  control  system  design, we  need  to  ensure  stability. Means  your  system  shouldn't  diverge. But  in  some  case, you  may  have  marginally stable,  which  create  oscillation. In  that  case,  you  also  cannot  apply this  serm  because  you don't  have  a  limit  for  the  oscillatory  case. We  should  be  careful about  the  application  of  the  ser. Now  let's  look  at  some  results. For  example,  for  this  z  transform, we  have  two  poles. If  you  check,  you  can  do  a  subtraction, the  denominator  will  be  this  time  this. One  pole  is  at  one. That's  the  simple  pole.  This  is  simple. This  met  the  condition,  and  for  this, the  pole  is  inside unit  circle  because  a  is  a  pose, which  means  80, the  magnitude  of  this  is  less  than  one. We  can  apply  the  sorem. You  have  two  posts,  one  is  inside, and  one  is  at  one, which  meet  the  condition. Therefore,  you  apply the  final  value  theorem  to  them, to  infinity,  you  just multiply  one  model  z  inverse  with  x  z. You  get  this,  you  sub  T  this  two  here, and  then  you  multiply  this  in the  first  term,  work  one, for  the  second  term,  you  multiply  here, then  that  work  v  to  zero. This  nit  is  one. In  fact,  you  can  also  verify  this  because these  ones  form  here  is obtained  from  this  function. You  can  say  when  t  go  to  infinity, or  k  go  to  infinity  for  the  sample  value, this  will  go  to  zero. The  limit  is  one.  This  is the  summary  of  property.  Yes. Some  of  the  property  will  be given  in  the  final  exam  and  also  in  the  quiz. I  I  properties  are  not  given, the  note  required  in  the  exam  question. We  don't  give  all  of  them. We  We  just  give  some  necessary  ones. That's  the  Z  transform  and  the  properties. We  have  inverse  transform. Let  me  formulate  the  problem. You  are  given  X,  and  you  want  to f  the  cresonding  time  function. That's  the  problem  to  be  solved, which  is  the  inverse  z  transform. D  loted  as  z  inverse  Z. You  are  given  x  and  you  want  to  find the  time  domain  function  x. That's  the  question  to  be  addressed. As  our  Z,  it  depending on  the  sample  the  values. With  non  negative  integers. When  you  consider  inverse  this  transform, you  can't  aigate  x  k. If  a  t  is  not  given, you  can't  inigate  x  k. Definitely,  you  cannot  get  x  t. When  you  find  inverse  transform, you  can  get  x  k. If  a  t  is  given, you  can  get  KT. You  cannot  get  x  t. I  mean,  X,  the  continuous  function. In  fact,  there  are  many  xt that  can  match  your  x  K  or  X  KT. For  example,  in  this  diagram, We  have  x  KT  given  as  this  points. The  corresponding  x  t can  be  a  unit  state  function, or  can  be  a  function  like  this, as  long  as  this  curve  a  cross, the  sample  the  values. It's  impossible  to  get  x  t. But  you  can  get  x  k  or  x  k. To  find  the  inverse,  this ts  form  is  basically two  f  x  k  or  x  KT  from  the  given  x  z. We  have  four  approaches to  do  inverse  transform. One  is  called  direct  division. Se  method  is  called  computational  methods. Third  method  is  called partial  fraction  expansion  method, and  finally,  inverse  integral  methods. We  come  back  next  week to  study  this  four  methods. We  stop  here  today.
