Okay.  Let's  start.  Yeah. Today,  we  will  started  with the  consideration  of  settling  time. Actually  stylin  time  is very  important  specification for  our  control  system. It  will  indicate  how fast  your  system  in  response  to  input. Actually  stin  time  is  not  due. For  example,  when  you  study  circuit, you  have  first  order  RC  circuit. If  you  consider  the  charging  process, you  will  have  first  order  transfer  function. Something  like  this.  Yeah,  1/1  plus t.  This  is  a  first  order  system. If  you  apply  step  input  to  the  system, you  would  have  this  response. That's  step. Assume  the  initial  condition  is  zero, the  response  would  be  like  this. Yeah,  just  like  the  voltage  of  the  capacitor, it  will  be  charged  by  a  DC  source. When  this  value  of  the  voltage reaches  98%  of  the  final  value. Yeah.  This  is  the  time d  for  the  output  to  reach  this  value, and  this  is  the  stone  time. This  is  called  98%  stone  time. Actually  after  this  time, your  arrow  between  the  final  value  and the  actual  value  of the  output  will  be  within  2%. Yeah.  Sometimes  it  is  also called  2%  error  specification. Under  this  time  is  k24  times  t.  Yeah, this  toile  is  the  time  constant. That's  for  a  first  order  system. Now,  we  are  going  to  consider the  corresponding  em  representation of  this  stonin  time. When  you  consider  em,  normally, you  will  consider  the  pole of  the  transfer  function. For  this  first  order  system, your  pole  will  be,  you  have  one  pole. This  pole  will  be  addictive  one  over  to. This  one  over  toe  can be  determined  by  stonin  time. We  define  this  one  over  to  as  Sigma  one. Then  if  you  are  given  the  stone  time, you  can  find  Sigma  one. As  a  showing  below. Just  now,  based  on  this  relationship, the  stonin  time  is  four  times  t, and  the  R  toll  is  just one  over  sigma  one  from  this. Based  on  this,  you can  calculate  your  sigma  one, which  is  four  divide  by  T  S  prime. Yeah,  this  TS  prime  is  given. When  you  are  required to  design  control  system, this  specification  is  given  to  you. This  is  the  sigma  one  value, and  you  can  lot this  pole  is  at  this  position  here. This  is  a  negative  sigma  one. No  means  in  the  S  plane. For  the  first  order  system, the  corresponding  pole  is  at  this  location, which  is  a  negative  sigma  one, and  the  sig  one  is computed  using  this  formula. When  you  are  given  this  ts  prime. Yeah,  actually,  this  can be  generalized  to  high  order  system. For  example,  if  you  have a  second  order  system, you  may  have  a  pair of  complex  conjugate  poles, such  as  negative  sigma  plus  J  one  mig  one. In  the  first  order  case, you  don't  have  the  imaginary  part. Now  if  you  have  second  order, you  may  have  an  imaginary  part. You  just  need  to  consider  the  real  part. In  this  case,  across  this  pole, negative  sigma  one,  you  can  do a  vertical  noine.  This  vertical  noine, With  this  vertical  nine  or  the  pause, and  this  nine  will  give  you  this  stonine  time because  you  have  the  same  sigma  one. Now,  in  practice,  normally the  ctonine  time  be required  to  be  equal  to  a  given  value. In  this  case,  if  you want  stonin  time  to  be  less  or  equ  to  that, then  the  actual  pool  location. Or  be  in  the  shaded  area  here. Now  this,  you  should  have more  negative  real  pots. In  other  words,  the  magnitude of  sigma  one  should  be bigger  equ  magnitude  of Sigma  should  be  bigger  sigma  one. In  this  case,  in this  region,  the  shaded  region, you  will  have  the  given  stonine  timeless  O to  this  given  value. This  is  the  boundary  for  your  stonine  time. Once  you  find  the  region  in  the  e  plane, you  can  use  the  mapping. Z  equals  e  two  PST  to  fund the  corresponding  region  in  the  Z  plane. So  just  the  map  this  boundary. You  know  this  negative  Sigma  one, the  boundary  is  map  to this  circle  with  readers, two  negative  Sigma  one  t, according  to  this  mapping  here. For  the  region  here, it  will  be  inside  this  circle. If  you  want  to  have  syne  times  e to  the  given  value, the  pole  in  the  discrete  time  system should  be  within  this  circle. That's  how  you  determine the  poles  of  the  closed loop  discrete  time  system. The  idea  for  us  to  fund  this  region  is  the first  to  fund  the  boundary.  Sigma  one. Once  you  get  the  boundary, Then  you  have  this  boundary, of  course,  is  in  the  S  plane. Then  you  use  the  mapping, you  can  find  the  boundary  in  the  Z  plane. Then  for  all  the satin  time  list  down  to  this  boundary, then  you  have  the  pause inside  the  unit  circle. That's  about  stin  time. Next  is  about  constant  frequency  lose. In  this  case,  we  have  this  showing  here. Constant  frequency  means  Omega  is  fixed. With  Omega  fixed,  your  sigma  can  change. Then  based  on  this  mapping here,  this  is  the  mapping. You  can  see  that  the  image  of this  constant  Omega  will be  will  give  you  a  constant  angle. Be  the  angle  here,  this  is the  angle  is  e  to  Omega  t. Then  the  magnitude, this  magnitude  is  changing. Be  Sigma  can  be  from negative  infinity  to  positive  infinity. When  sigma  is  a  negative  infinity, this  magnitude  is  zero. Then  when  sigma  is increasing  from negative  infinity  to  post  infinity, the  magnitude  will  increase from  zero  to  infinity. Therefore,  the  image  will  be  a  radio  nine. Like  this.  For  example,  in  this  diagram, we  have  three  horizontal  noines. Because  our  Omega  is  fixed. O  Omega  is  constant, the  image  in  the  S  plane or  horizontal  horizontal  nine. In  this  case,  for  example, for  J  Omega  one, the  image  or  in  the  Z  plane. Because  the  angle  of this  is  fixed  as  mig  one  t. W  Omega  one  is  constant, this  angle  will  be  constant. But  the  magnitude  will change  from  zero  to  infinite. That's  the  image  of  this. Then  for  the  negative  j  omega  one, you  have  image  isso  in  here because  the  angle  will  be  negative  mg  one  t, this  angle,  and  the  magnitude is  from  zero  to  infinite  like  this. That's  how  we  find  the  image of  constant  frequency  lose  in  the  Z  plane. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. Now  let's  look  at  this  rectangle and  we  want  to  find  the  image of  the  shaded  area  in the  plane  map  to  the  Z  plane. What  we  do  is  to  consider the  boundary  of  the  rectangle. We  have  two  vertical  and  two  horizontal  none. For  vertical  nine,  net  Sigma  two, the  image  will  be circle  centered  at  the  all  region. Readers  is  netive  Sigma  two  t. That's  this  circle. That's  the  image  of  this  boundary. Now  on  the  right  side  of  this  vertical  nine, the  image  should  be  outside,  this  circuit. That's  the  image  of the  region  and  the  right  side of  this  vertical  nine. Now,  consider  this  boundary sigma  nec  sigma  one. The  image  of  this  boundary will  be  this  bigger  circuit. With  the  readers  probative  Sigma  one t.  For  the  region  and the  left  side  of  this  vertical  nine, The  image  should  be  inside  this  circle. That  should  be  inside  this. We  have  the  two  vertical  nones considered  and  now  we consider  the  two  horizontal  nine. For  this  negative  j  omega  two, the  angle  will  be  netive  Omega  two  t. That's  this  radio  no. The  magnitude  will  be  from zero  to  infinity.  That's  the  boundary. Given  here,  this  is  the  image. Above  this  horizontal  noi, the  angle  should  be  bigger, that  will  be  the  angle should  be  bigger  than  this  negative  Omega two  t.  It's  on  this  site. For  this  horizontal  noi, the  angle  is  postive  Omega  one  t. You  have  this  image. The  angle  for  this  is  fixed  as  Omega  one t.  Now  for  the  image  of  those  below  the  line, the  angle  should  be  smaller  than  this Omega  two,  Omega  one  t. On  the  right  side. Now  you  find  the  intersection of  the  full  region, you  get  this  shaded  area  in  the  Z  plane. That's  how  you  fund  the  region. Bonded  by  this  four  nois  in  the  Z  plane. That's  a  example  showing  how  we  find the  image  of  the  regions in  the  plane  map  to  the  Z  plane. Next,  we  have  constant  dumping  ratio. Yeah  I  believe  you  know what  is  the  dumping  ratio. For  dumping  ratio,  it  will be  relat  to  a  pair  of  complex  pole. For  example,  you  have  this  two  poles. If  you  look  at  the  S  plane, we  are  consider  S  plane. One  pole  is  here. The  real  part  is a  negative  Zeta  Omega  n,  as  you  can  see  here. The  imaginary  part  is  Omega  n  square  root, one  minor  zeta  square. Yeah,  actually,  this  is from  the  seconder  system  like  this. If  you  consider  a  seconder  system, which  is  Omega  n  square, that's  the  numerator  given by  this  denominator  square. Plus  two  Zeta  Omega  n  plus  Omega  n  squared. Then  this  denominator  will give  you  this  two  poles. When  Zeta  is  0-1. In  this  case,  you  have  the  two  posts. This  is  the  real  part  and the  imaginary  part,  j  Omega N  square  root  one  minor  zero  square, and  this  is  diluted  as  Omega  d. You  have  this  pole  in  the  upper  half  plane. When  you  consider  this  transfer  function with  real  coefficient. If  you  have  one  complex  pole, then  the  conjugate  will  be  also a  pole  of  the  transfer  function. Now,  you  join  this  point  with  the  origin. Then  you  can  see  that  the distance  from  this  pole  to the  origin  is  Omega n.  You  can  do  a  calculation. And  this  angle  here. Maybe  we  call  this  angle  alpha. Then  you  can  see  that  cosine  alpha is  equ  to  ta, because  cosine  alpha  is  equ  to this  height  divided  by this,  so  it's  just  Zeta. For  constant  dumping  ratio, that  means  this  Zeta  is  constant. This  Zeta  is  constant. That's  called  the  constant  dumping  ratio. In  this  case,  with  this  relationship, you  can  see  this  alpha  to  be  fixed. That  means  for a  constant  dumping  ratio  in  the  S  plane, You  should  have  a  strain  noi  like  this. With  the  angle  alpha fixed  and the  cosine  alpha  is  the  dumping  rage. Now  what  we  are  going  to do  is  to  find  the  image  of this  straight  noi  in the  Z  plane  through  the  app. This  is  just  one  branch. You  should  have  another  branch in  the  dower  half  plane. Now,  how  we  find  the  image  of  this  branch? If  you  know  how  to  find  the image  of  this  branch, you  should  know  how  to find  the  image  of  this. You  can  just  do  a  reflection. Now  let's  focus  and looking  for  the  image  of this  t.  Straight  noi. Now,  this  is  the  mapping to  be  considered  z  equals  E  S  t, and  the  E  is  exponential  function. You  just  substitute  this For  every  pole  on  this, you  should  have  this  relationship with  Zta  as  a  constant. You  just  substitute  this  to  the  mapping. You  have  this.  Then  you  do  some  calculation. Here,  we  just  do  some  substitution. This  t,  is  changed  to  two  Pi  divided  by Omega  because  Omega  A is  the  samponing  period in  radians  per  second. Two  Pi  over  Omega  is  this  t. From  here,  our  omega  n, this  omega  n  square  root one  minor  za  square  will  be  omega  d. Omega  n  is  in  fact  Omega  d divided  by  this  square  root one  minor  za  square. We  have  this  substitution  to  have  this. Of  course,  this  t  is  two  Pi  over  ma. This  is  a  simple  substitution. Now,  from  this,  we  know the  magnitude  will  be to  e  to  part  of  this  real  part. The  angle,  this  case, the  angle  is  the  imagery  part of  this  exponential  function, it's  two  Pi  omega  d  over  omega  S, and  that's  equivalent  to Omega  d  times  t  because two  Pi  over  omega  S  is  t,  same  as  this. Now,  we  are  going  to consider  the  image  of this,  you  should  have  a  variable. Here,  we  consider  omega  d  as  a  variable. Yeah  because  one  omega  d  is changed  from  zero  to  infinity. When  this  R  f  is  fixed, the  corresponding  constant  ratione change  from  zero  to  this  infinite. We  consider  Omega  D  as  a  variable, increasing  from  zero, two  infinity.  We  consider  this. For  the  moment,  we  consider Omega  d  in  this  range. Later  on,  we  will  restrict  Omega  d  further. If  we  unique  at  this  two  expression, that  is  the  magnitude  and  the  angle. You  can  see  that  one  mega  d  increase from  zero  to  infinity. This  magnitude  will  decrease  explanialy, because  this  is  a  negative  sign  here. On  the  other  hand,  the  angle  will increase  linearly  as  Omega  d  increase. We  have  this  observation. If  our  dumping  ratio  is  pn  zero, as  this  Omega  Omega d  over  omega  increase.  Yeah. No  that  Omega  S  is  constant, which  is  a  sampling  frequency in  regions  per  second. We  can  see  that  from  this  magnitude or  decrease  exponentially, but  the  angle  will  increase  linearly. In  this  way,  you  have  this  image  in  z  plane. This  is  in  the  Z  plane. You  can  see  one  mega  d  from  here, increase  from  zero  to  infinity,  like  this. The  magnitude  is  reducing  exponentially. But  the  angle,  this  is the  angle  or  increase  linearly. You  have  this  logarithm, spiral.  That's  like  this. For  example,  this  3.4  0.1. We  start  with  this  point. Four  point  at  the  region, you  should  have  this  image. Now  this  one  omega  d  is  zero. O  omega  d  over  omega  S  is  zero. That's  the  image  because  the  angle  is zero,  magnetite  is  one. Now  Omega  d  is  half  omega  here. Then  the  corresponding  point  in the  constant  ratio  nine  is  here. When  Omega  d  over  omega  S  is  half, that  is  Omega  d  is half  omega  S.  Then  you  have  this  image. Because  the  angle  here  will  be  Pi. You  can  do  a  calculation  by using  the  relationship  here. If  this  omega  d  divid  omega  is  0.5, then  this  angle  is  Pi. The  magnitude,  you  can  compute the  magnitude  from  this  relationship. This  is  a  half. You  do  a  calculation,  it  will  be  neg  this. Then  when  one  mega  the  increase further  to  one  mega, that  will  be  this  point. The  magnitude  will  reduce  further, but  here  the  angle  will  increase  to  pi. You  just  continue  this. This  will  be  the  image of  this  constant  ratio  no. That's  the  constant  dumping  ratio  noi. Actually,  If  you  recall  last  week's  lecture, we  said  our  Omega  will be  limited  in  the  primary  strip. We  have  the  concept  of  primary  strip. That  is  this.  Here. Primary  ste  means  r  Omega  D,  in  this  case, in  the  diagram,  shall  be  omega  d  s  be limited  from  zero  to  half  omega  S. In  this  diagram,  that  means  Omega  D  will be  limited  from  zero  to  half  omega  here. In  this  case,  when  we  consider the  image  of  this  constant  ragione, we  just  limit  Omega  d  in  this  range. Therefore,  the  image  will be  just  this  portion. Okay.  So  that's  this  portion  here. Actually,  you  can  also  consider  example. Wind  Zeta  is  0.3, then  you  just  use  the  relationship, we  have  here  to  do a  calculation  for  this  relationship. You  can  use  this  relationship  to  do a  calculation  to  fund the  magnitude  and  the  angle. You  can  see  when  this  is  a  quarter, then  you  have  this  magnitude, W  Zeta  is  0.3, and  the  angle  is  nine  degree. In  that  case,  it's  a  point  here. That's  this  point,  90  degree. You  can  do  further  calculation,  0.5, that's  this  just  mentioned, you  have  this  magnitude  and  this  angle. That's  example. Now,  as  I  just  mentioned, we  will  our  go  D. That  is  the  imaginary  part to  be  in  this  range, which  is  in  the  primary  strip  region. When  you  consider  the  image  of  this  branch, you  just  have  this  image here  for  different  dumping  ratio. Here  is  the  case  when  dumping  ratio  is  zero. If  a  dumping  ratio  is  zero, you  have  a  same  circle. Yeah,  dumping  ratio  is  0.2,  is  like  this. When  dp  ratio  is  0.4, is  this,  then  when  dumping  ratio  is  one. That's  this  strain  noi. When  dumping  ratio  is  one, you  angle  here,  this  is  the  one, your  angle  here,  R  f  should  be  zero. You  just  have  the  real  x  here. This  is  the  case  when  dumping  ratio  is  one. In  this  case,  the  angle  zero, then  you  just  change this  from  zero  to  infinity. When  this  is  zero.  That's  this  point. Then  the  images  at  this  location. When  this  go  to  infinity, that's  negative  real  x, the  readers  or  the  magnitude  will  be  zero. That's  this  part.  This  is the  case  when  dimin  redo  is  one. That's  for  the  upper  branch. How  about  the  branch? This  neural  branch  can be  found  by  reflection. So  you  should  have  an  image  like  this. For  example,  for  this  Zeta  equal  a  one, Zeta  equals  eta  one, this  Zeta  one  is  0-1. In  this  case,  you  have this  portion for  the  upper  branch  for  dower  branch. You  can  just  do  a  reflection  of this  to  the  dower  half  plane  in  the  Z  plane. Is  the  mirror  image  of  this. You  have  this  heart  shaped figure  for  this  constant  dumping  ratio  noi. Now,  in  the  case, you  have  dump  go  bigger  than  this  a  one. That's  the  shaded  area  in  the  e  plane. The  image  will  be the  shaded  area  in  the  Z  plane. That's  the  region  enclosed by  this  hot  shaped  figure. This  is  the  image  of  that. This  is  about  dumpin  ratio. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. In  this  example,  you are  given  two  specifications. One  is  the  stonin  time, should  be  listed  on  or  equal four  second  with  a  2%  ero  tons. Sometimes  you  may  have  5%  ero  tons. For  5%  s,  then  the  answer  will  be  different. Just  now,  we  have  four  for  2%. If  it  was  5%, you  need  spend  time,  that  will  be  set. This  is  from  continuous  control  system. That's  the  first  requirement. The  second  requirement  is the  damping  ratio  should  be  in  this  range. You  have  to  family  the  region of  the  pose  in  the  Z  plane, which  beat  these  two  requirements. And  the  sampling  period is  given  to  be  1  second. Why  do  we  need  the  sampling  period? Because  in  the  mapping, we  have  t  involved. If  you  look  at  this,  so  you  have  to  use  this. You  need  this  t  to  find the  region  in  the  Z  plane. Now  let's  look  at  the  solution. First,  we  consider  the  d  the  sting  time. Yeah,  this  is  the  continuous  time  pole for  second  order  continuous  time  system. I  just  mentioned  this  when we  consider  the  dumping  ratio  case. This  is  the  real  part, this  is  the  imagerin  part. We  need  our  stone  time  to  be  less  week  to four  second  at  the  2%  ero  terns. Based  on  this,  we  found  the  boundary. That  is,  we  found  the  sigma  one, cspond  to  four  second. Earlier,  we  have  a  formula to  compute  our  sigma  one. You  have  to  use  this  In  our  case, this  t  prime  is  four  second. I  a  calculation,  sigma  one  is based  on  this  is  4/4  is  one. This  is  the  boundary.  Now,  look  at the  diagram,  this  sigma. Actually,  this  sigma  is  equivalent  to Zomig  n  in  this  case. This  sigma,  which  is  Za  omega  n, should  be  bigger  sigma  one. That  means  the  magnitude  is  bigger. That  the  pole, which  is  a  negative  sigma will  be  inside  this  region. That  is  on  the  left  side. Your  sigma  will  be  bigger  equ  one. But  the  negative  sigma  will  be less  than  or  equ  net  one. Yeah,  time  net  one  on  both  side, you  have  sigma  less  than  equ  net  one. Then  you  find  the  image of  this  boundary  in  the  Z  plan, you  just  calculate  net  one. You  have  the  readers, Then  the  actual  region in  the  Z  plane  should  be  list  to  e  n  one. So  you  have  this  circle  as  the  boundary, then  to  meet  the  C  time  requirement, you  should  be  inside  this  region. So  this  first  requirement. So  to  meet  the  first  requirement, you  should  have  this  image here  within  this  circle. The  readers  is  calculated  to  be  0.36  79. Now  for  the  second  requirement. Actually,  this  case,  you  just  use the  image  we  considered. You  have  this  hot  shaped  area,  figure. Then  for  a  fig  I  0.7  of  seven,  but  this  one, be  the  region,  Inside  this  hot  shaped  figure. Zo  equals  one  this is  the  image  for  za  equals  one. We  have  this  region  to  meet  this  requirement. Now,  to  meet  both  requirements, you  funded  the  intersection. That's  this  result. We  have  both  cases  considered. You  should  have  funded  the  intersection. The  poles  in  the  p  should  be  this  region. That's  a  example. Another  example  is  to find  the  region  in  the  Z  plane  that corresponds  to  a  desired  region  in the  shaded  area  of  the  plane. We  have  a  few  boundaries, two  horizontal  noi  here, one  vertical  noi, and  two  constant  dumping  ratio  noi. Actually,  one  constant  dumping  ratio  no, the  upper  branch  and  thew  branch. We  just  consider  all  the  boundaries. This  will  give  you  this  two  nois. Two  horizontal  noi,  will  give you  this  two  radio  nine  with  constant  angle. For  this  vertical  noi, you  have  this  boundary. That's  a  circle  centered  at  the  origin. Readers  is  netive  sigma  one  t. For  this  constant  dumping  ratio, you  have  this  art  shaped  figure. Then  for  the  desired  region, you  consider  the  inters  section. You  have  this  result  in  the  Z  plane. That's  about  the  magin between  S  plane  and  the  Z  plane. The  important  relationship  used  here  is  this. In  the  S  plane,  you use  rectangular  form to  represent  the  variable. In  the  Z  plane,  you  use the  polar  form  to represent  the  complex  variable  Z. You  have  magnitude,  you  have  angle. Now,  next  is  the  discussion of  stability  of  a  closed  loop  system. Suppose  we  have  this  feedback  system with  feed  forward  transfer  function, G  Z,  feedback  transfer  function  H, we  have  neative  feedback. Then  you  can  find the  pulse  transfer  function  for this  closed  sop  system from  input  r  to  output  C. I  will  be  g  divide  one  plus  G. Based  on  this,  we  want to  check  the  stability  of  this  system. To  do  that,  We  need  to  find the  pause  of the  closed  loop  transfer  function. To  find  the  pause,  just solve  the  equation  chewing  here. The  solution  of  this  equation  will  give  you the  pose  of  the  system. If  it's  order  system, you  have  n  pose, including  complex  poles,  repeated  pose. For  stability  in  the  S  plane, or  the  pole  should  be  in  the  left  off  plane. Now  for  stability  in  the  Z  plane, or  the  pose  should  be  inside  the  unit  circle. This  is  the  requirement  for  stability. All  the  poles  should be  inside  the  unit  circle. If  you  have  one  pole  outside  the  unit  circle, then  you  have  instability. But  in  some  case, you  may  have  critical  stability. No  that  means  you may  have  poles  and  the  unit  circle. If  you  have  one  simple  pole  at  z  equals  one, then  in  this  case, you  have  critical  stability. Because  in  this  case, the  signal  won't  go  to  infinity. Istability  means  you  have some  signal  in  the  system  diverge. In  this  case,  if  we  have  symple  pole  at  z equals  one,  signal  won't  diverge. In  this  case,  it  is  critical  stability. If  we  have  a  single  pair of  complex  conical  pole  and  the  unit  circle, you  also  have  critical  stability. In  this  case,  you  have  cation, stain  cilation. The  signal  will  go  to  infinity. But  if  you  have  a  multiple pole  and  the  unit  circle, your  system  will  be  unstable. In  our  case,  when  we  talk  about  stability, we  just  mean  strict  stability. Later  on,  when  we study  the  stability  condition, and  even  in  the  excise  or  in  the  exam, if  we  asked  to  consider  stability, we  should  ensure  all  the  posts inside  unit  circle. In  this  case,  critical  stability  is not  considered as  our  stability  in  this  course. Actually  critical  stability  or critically  stable  system  is  not  robust. Because  once  we  have some  uncertainty  or  perturbation, your  system  may  be  unstable, we  shouldn't  allow  that. In  our  course,  when  we  talk about  stability  or  stable  system, we  should  ensure  all  the  posts inside  the  unit  circle. How  do  we  How  do  we  check  stability? One  way  is  to  solve  the  equation here  to  find  all  the  solution. If  all  the  solutions  are  inside the  unit  circle  then  your  system  is  stable. But  in  many  cases, this  is  very  tedious, especially  when  you  have  a  high  water  system, solving  this  equation  is  difficult. Sometimes,  you  may  have  unknown  parameters. In  the  equation, so  you  don't  know  how  to  solve  it. For  example,  if  you have  a  contonar  gain  here, you  want  to  determine the  contonar  gain  to  ensure  stability. You  have  to  find  the  range for  the  contonar  gain. Then  solve  this  equation  is  not practical  when  you  have a  unknown  parameter  in  the  equation. In  this  case,  we don't  have  to  solve  the  equation. Actually  is  no  necessary to  solve  the  equation. When  you  solve  the  equation, you  get  the  exact  equation. Or  exact  poles. But  we  just  need  to  know whether  the  poles  are inside  the  unit  circle  or  not. In  this  case,  we  don't  use  stability. We  don't  have  to  solve  the  equation. How  about  the  numerator? Well  the  numerator  affect  the  stability? The  answer  is  no. The  numerator  give  you  zeros. Zeros  have  no  effect  on  stability. It  can  be  outside  the  unit  circle  or  inside, so  it  can  be  anywhere. When  you  talk  about  stability, don't  worry  about  zeros. However,  the  zeros will  affect  the  performance. The  zeros  do  not  affect  stability, but  they  will  affect  the  performance. Now  we  don't  solve  the  equation. Then  we  have  to  use  a  test  to check  whether  all  the  poles are  inside  the  unit  circle  or  not. This  test  is  called  jury  test. Now  let's  consider  jury  stability  test. Suppose  the  denominator  is in  water  polynomial  showing  here. We  have  coefficient,  A  zero, a  one,  a  two  up  to  A  n. This  is  S  order  polynomial, and  without  loss  of  generality, we  assume  a  zero  is  a  positive. Before  we  show  you  the  test, we  have  to  form  a  jury  table. How  do  we  form  the  jury  table? We  have  some  rules  to  do  this. This  is  the  row  First, using  the  given  polynomial. Yeah,  that  means  your  p  is  given  here. You  have  a  zero,  a  one, a  two  up  to  a  n  given. From  those  coefficients, you  form  two  rows  like  this. A  n  is  the  constant. For  the  first  row,  you just  for  the  coefficients in  A  n  up  to  a  zero. This  is  ascending  water. Then  for  the  second  row, just  reverse  the  water  of  the  first  row. You  get  the  two  rows.  That's  that's how  we  get  the  first  two  rows from  the  given  p. Now,  from  these  two  rows, we  are  going  to  form  the  third  row. Yeah,  this  third  row  is called  the  coefficients  b. Here,  you  have  to  find  bn  minus  one, bn  minus  two,  b minus  three  up  to b  zero.  How  do  we  find  this? B  coefficients,  you  just consider  this  formula  here. For  Bk,  you  form  two  by  two  matrix, for  the  first  con  is  a  n  and  a  zero. A  n  zero,  that's  this. Yeah,  that's  the  first  con in  the  first  two  roles. Now,  if  we  want  to  compute  this, That  means,  your  k  is  n  minus  one. If  k  is  minus  one, you  form  the  second  con. If  a  k  is  n  minus  one, this  will  be  a  zero, this  will  be  a  n.  That  means  you  use  this two  constant  to  form the  second  conn.  Once you  have  this  two  by  two  matrix, you  compute  the  determinant. You  get  this  coefficient. Now,  for  this  second  one  here, you  can  see  the  first  conn  is  fixed. You  don't  change  this. But  you  have  to  replace the  two  elements  of the  two  by  two  matrix  by  this  two. You  just  replace  this  two  by  this  two. You  can  use  the  formula  is  next. In  this  case,  your  is  m  minus  two. M  minus  one  minus  n  minus  two  is  one. That's  why  you  have  a  one here  and  this  a  m  minus  one. From  this  two  by  two  matrix, you  compute  the  determinant,  you  get  this. Now  for  the  next  one,  you use  this  as  your  second  con. You  just  continue  until  this  b  zero. Until  b  zero,  then  you  use this  two  elements  as  your  second, then  you  do  a  calculation. This  is  how  you  get  the  B  coefficients. That's  the  third  row. Once  you  get  third  row  for  the  fourth  row, just  reverse  the  order of  the  third  row,  you  get  this. Now,  you  continue  to  the  fifth  row, but  the  fifth  row, you  use  the  third  row and  the  fourth  row  two  to  calculation. For  example,  for  this  element, you  also  need  to  form  two  by  two  matrix. But  the  first  conn  will  be  this  two  elements. Second  for  this  conn  will  be  two  elements. The  need  to  calculate  determinant. For  this,  you  have  to replace  the  two  elements  by  this  two. Continue  until  you  get  the  C  zero. Once  you  get  the  C  zero, you  finish  the  fifth row  and  now  for  the  sixth  row, you  just  reverse  the  water. This  procedure  continue  and  Q. This  s  rod,  where you  just  have  three  elements. The  three  elements  means the  polynomial  will  be  second  order. This  is  how  you  form  the  jury  table. Once  you  have  the  jury  table, now  we  can  use the  table  to  check  the  stability. We  have  four  conditions for  your  system  to  be  stable. First  condition  is  the  magnitude of  A  n.  That  is  the  constant  magnitude, should  be  less  than  e  zero. And  P  one. Yeah.  You  just  calculate  p  one. For  this  polynomial,  should  be  positive. You  have  to  compute  p  elective  one. P  netive  one  should  be  ground  zero. If  n  is  even  number. For  example,  second  order, fs  order,  and  one. If  this  is  order,  for  example, third  order,  P  net  one  should  be  zero. That's  the  third  condition. For  the  first  three  condition, you  don't  need  to  use  the  table. But  for  the  fourth  condition, you  have  to  use  the  table  given  here. You  should  compare  this coefficient  with  B  zero, then  this  coefficient  with  C  zero, just  the  first  one  and  the  last  one, and  this  one  and  the  lost  one. The  magnitude  of  the  first  one should  be  bigger  than the  magnitude  of  the  lost  one. You  have  four  conditions. Now  if  you  have  a  second  order  system, you  don't  have  to  form  the  table. You  just  need  to consider  the  first  three  conditions. T  check  stability. This  is  a  important  test and  you  have  to  remember  this  conditions. Next,  we'll  consider  some  examples. For  example,  we  have this  fors  water  polynomial. You  want  to  check  whether this  PZ  has  all  the  roots inside  un  circle  or  not. As  I  said,  you  can  solve  the  equation, but  this  solution  may  be  difficult. If  you  just  do  this  just solve  the  equation  manually, I  think  it's  not  so  easy. We  can  use  the  condition, just  mentioned,  to  check  the  stability. That  is  to  check  if all  the  roots  are  inside  circle. Here  is  the  condition  we  need  to  consider. Now  our  A  four  magnitude as  you  can  see,  is  0.08. This  A  zero  is  one. This  is  0.08  is  less  than  one. The  first  condition  here  is  satisfied. Now,  you  calculate  P  one. Just  change  z21. You  do  a  calculation,  is  one -1.2  plus  0.07  plus  0.3  -0.08? You  get  this  answer,  big zero,  sc  conditions  satisfied. Cert  condition,  you  calculate  P  t  one. They  have  this  1.89  big  than  zero. This  is  four,  this  P net  one  should  be  bigger  than  zero. Therefore,  certain  conditions  satisfied. Now,  for  the  final  condition, you  have  to  form  the  table. How  do  we  form  the  table? You  just  use  the  procedure. I  mentioned.  Yes,  like  this. You  have  to  basically, you  have  to  compute  the  B, and  you  have  to  compute  the  C  for  this  case. To  compute  the  B, you  have  to  use  the  Yeah, this  is  the  constant, and  this  is  the  reversed. This  is  the  first  conon  fixed, and  this  is  the  not  conon. T  compare  B  three,  that's  the  first  element, you  have  to  use  this  con,  then complete  this  determinant, you  get  this  answer. Now  for  B  two,  you  have  to replace  this  by  the  second  not  con, and  the  compute  determinant, and  then  B  one,  cust  column, and  you  get  this  determinant, and  finally  b  zero. That's  how  you  get  this  C, you  also  use  the  same  procedure. Therefore,  we  have  B  three, and  the  B  zero  here. We  have  C  two  and  the  C  zero, which  will  be  used  in  the  force  condition. You  do  a  calculation  do  a  comparison, P  three,  that's  this. The  magnitude  is  0.994, that  bigger  the  magnitude  of  this. And  similarly,  this  C  two  magnitude  is  this. That's  bigger  than  the  magnitude  of  this. All  four  conditions  are  satisfied. Therefore,  this  polynomial  is  stable. In  fact,  if  you  really want  to  solve  the  equation, you  have  this  four  pole. The  inside  the  unit  circle. That's  one  example. Now  let's  look  at  the  order  polynomial. Just  follow  the  same  four  conditions. She  here.  Yeah.  You  have to  remember  these  four  conditions. First  condition,  compare  A  three  magnitude with  A  zero,  magnitude. This  is  true. P  one,  calculate  p10. In  this  case,  force  stability, this  should  bigger  than  zero. In  fact,  when  this  is  zero, your  system  is  not  strictly  stable  already. But  this  implies  you have  a  poll  at  the  z  equals  one. You  have  poll  at  d  z  equals  one? Because  when  z  equals  one, this  equation  is  spike. Z  equals  one  is  a  root  of  this  equation. At  least  one  root  at  z  equals  one. Now  you  can  put  p  next  one  then satisfied  because  this  is  out  for  this  case. This  will  be  less  than  zero, and  the  You  have  to  form Jury  table  as  we follow  in  the  procedure  we  mentioned. That's  the  given  polynomial  coefficients in  ascending  order  reverse  the  order, then  from  this  two  by  two  matrix, you  have  this  B  two  computed. Then  for  B  one, you  use  this  two  by  two. Actually,  for  stability,  you  don't  need  to compute  B  one  because  it's  not  required. You  just  need  to  compute  B  two  and  B  zero. For  the  nos  row,  you  don't have  to  compute  the  middle  one. B  zero  is  obtained using  this  two  by  two  matrix  this. Now  you  compare  B  two  magnitude with  B  zero  magnitude. That's  true. Force  conditions  are  also  satisfied. We  just  can't  claim. This  is  critically  stable because  you  have  a  pole  and  the  unit  circul. Now,  We  have  another  example  er  order  system. You  just  follow  the  procedure to  check  the  four  conditions. Now  for  P  one,  you  can  P  one. Is  a  negative  0.14. Actually,  this  is  zero  already. From  this,  you  can  already  tell, this  is  an  unstable  system. Be  that's  negative. You  can  stop  here.  You  don't  have  to do  any  further  calculation  of  further  test. When  you  give  a  polynomial, especially  high  water  polynomial, you  don't  form  the  jury  table  first. You  check  the  first  three  condition. If  one  of  the  conditions  is  not  satisfied, then  you  just  stop  to point  out  your  system  is  unstable. If  all  the  three  conditions  are  satisfied, then  you  go  to  the  false  condition. In  this  case,  you  need  to  check the  You  need  to  form  the  Jury  table. This  is  the  ser  polynomial, which  shows  instability. Now,  let's  consider a  control  system  showing  here. Yeah. This  is  a  feedback  control  system  in zero  M  and  the  sampling  period  is  1  second. From  this  question,  we  know the  system  is  unit  feedback  to  system. Unit  feedback  means  our  H  is  one. Yeah  I  H  is  one, that  will  be  unit  feedback. The  transfer  function  G  Z, this  GZ  is  given  here. You  have  a  constant  k  here, which  may  be  the  proportional  cont  gain. The  question  require  you  to  determine the  range  of  k  for  stability. Now  to  do  this, you  have  to  find the  close  to  transfer  function. Yeah,  because  this  is just  the  transfer  function g.  You  have  to  use  this  formular. By  substituting,  G  and  H  h. You  have  this  result. That's  the  close  sloop  transfer  function. We  just  consider  the  denominator. The  numerator  has  no  effect and  the  stability. Based  on  this,  r  A  zero  is  one, that  means  the  coefficient of  z  square  is  one, and  the  A  one  is  the  coefficient  of  z, and  the  A  two  is  the  constant  term. Now,  based  on  the  test, we  just  need  to  consider the  first  three  conditions. You  don't  need  to consider  the  false  condition. First  condition,  your  A  two  magnitude should  be  less  than  e  zero. Second  condition,  P  one  should  be  pi  zero, S  condition,  P  t  one  should  be big  zero  because  two,  even. Based  on  this  three  condition, you  do  a  calculation. Okay,  this  is  the  slice  I  need  to  use. Now,  based  on  this  three  condition, you  get  three  inequalities. First  inequality,  This  A  two  magnitude, should  be  less  than  one. You  have  this.  I  believe you  know  how  to  solve  this  inequality. You  have  to  remove  the  out  sin. That  means  this  0.36  79  plus  0.2  62k, should  be  bigger  next  one, smaller  than  positive  one. You  solve  this,  you  get  this  range  of k.  Now,  P  one. You  just  compute  P  one. You  get  this  answer, that  should  be  positive. You  solve  this  inequality, h  be  bigger  zero. C  condition,  P  netive  one. Dt  one,  that  is  one, minors  this  plus  this,  be  bigger  zero. That's  the  condition  here. You  have  to  solve  this  inequality, you  get  this  solution  for  k. Now,  you  need all  these  three  conditions  to  be  satisfied. For  this  to  be  possible, you  have  to  fund  the overlapping  regions  for  k, and  this  is  the  answer. K  should  be  in  this  range. Based  on  this  size,  for  this  example, you  can  tell  your  system  is  stable and  certain  value  of k.  That  means  when  you  design  your  conton, you  have  to  be  careful to  choose  your  conton  gain. Otherwise,  you  may  have  an  unstable  system. In  fact,  when  k  is  equal  to  this, upper  bound,  your  system will  become  critically  stable. In  this  case,  you  will  have two  poles  and  the  unit  circle, actually  is  a  pair of  complex  conjugate  poles. You  have  oculation.  Yeah. Actually,  one  quals  this, close  polynomial  or  become  this. You  can  see  that,  you  have  these  two  poses. As  I  said,  it  is a  pair  of  complex  conugate  poles. In  fact,  from  this,  you  can also  find  the  frequency  of  oculion. Remember,  earlier  when  we found  when  we  consider the  constant  dumping  ratio  phase, we  have  a  formula  to  determine  the  angle. Yeah,  this  is  the  formula  here. You  can  find  the  Omega  d  from  this  formula to  determine  the  frequency  of  collation. Omega  d  is  the  imagery  point. Based  on  this,  if you  have  this  angle  available, you  have  the  sampling  period  available, then  you  can  get  the  Omega  d, which  is  one  over  t  times  the  angle  of  z. How  do  you  find  the  angle  of? Z  is  given  here. The  angle  of  this  complex  number is  just  the  inverse  tangent, the  magular  part,  divided  by  real  part. A  calculation,  you  get  this  value. This  is  about  stability. Next  topic,  is  also  stability  analysis. In  this  case,  you  will  use bin  transformation  to  do  analysis. Yeah,  this  bin  transformation is  a  tatters  method. In  our  exam,  we  don't  have  question. Red  to  this  method. But  it's  better  to  know  you  have such  a  choice  to  do  stabilities. The  idea  is,  you  do  this  transformation. Yeah,  you  change  to  W. Then  this  mapping  or  map the  inside  of  a  unit  circle  in the  Z  plane  to  the  left  plane  of  the  plane. You  can  prove  this.  Yeah. You  just  define  W  as  Sigma  plus  matter  Omega. Then  if  the  magnitude  is  less  than  one, that  will  be  equivalent  to Si  is  less  than  zero. You  can  do  this  calculation  easily. With  this,  you  do a  calculation  of  the  magnitude. By  this  substitution,  I  believe  you  know  how to  how  to  calculate  the  magnitude. It  is  the  magnitude  of  the  numerator divided  by  the  magnitude  of  denominator. But  in  our  case,  we  want  to  prove z  magnitude  or  be  less  than  one. What  we're  going  to  prove  is  this. The  magnitude  less  than  one  is equivalent  to  sigma  less  than  zero. I  have  sigma  less  than  zero, we  will  have  this. This  is  what  we  are  going  to  prove. When  you  compute  the  magnitude, you  will  have  square  root  involved. But  we  are  going  to  prove  this. We  just  consider  the  square someone  implies  this. Because  this  square  list and  one  is  equivalent to  z  list  one. This  say.  Now  you  just  consider  the  square  of this  the  square  of this  will  be  the  real  part square  plus  imaginar  part  square, the  real  part  is  sigma  plus  one, mgal  part  is  plus minus  omega,  so  you  have  this. That's  for  numerator.  For  denominator, s  minus  one  as  the  real  part, then  plus  omega  square. Yeah,  this  square  less and  one  will  be  the  same  as  this, as  I  just  mentioned. Now,  from  this,  we  are  going  to  prove  this. Times  the  denominator  on both  sides.  You  will  have  this  result. When  you  multiply  the  denominator, you  don't  have  to  change  the  sign of  the  equality because  the  denominator  is  positive. Now  you  solve  this  equality. You  have  this  result. You  can  see  this  is  the  equivalent. That's  the  statement  here.  This  is  the  proof. If  we  do  this  transformation, you  change  your  PZ  to  a  function  of  W. Then  you  can  use  the  rows array  method  to  check  stability. Now,  this  is  the  idea. You  replace  z  with this  in  your  given  polynomial. After  you  do  this,  you have  to  do  some  manipulation, then  you  get  a  rational  function  of  db. Now,  you  want  to  check  if  the  pole are  inside  the  unit  circle or  not  in  the  Z  plane, you  just  need  to  check  the  roots  of the  numerator  in  this  P  Z. Suppose  the  numerator  is P  prime  W.  Then  you  can chick  whether  all  the  roots  in the  left  plane  or  not  by  using the  rows  stability  criteria. Here  is  a  example. Suppose  you  have  this  false  order  polynomial showing  in  example  4.5. You  do  bin  transformation, you  get  this  P  from  W. Yeah.  The  calculation  is  quite  tedious  here. Each  of  this  z  should  be replaced  by  the  bindinar  transformation. That  means,  Every  z in  that  polynomial  to  be  changed  to  this. This  z  four  will  be  this  part  four. Then  you  have  z  cube, that  is  you  have  to  compute  this  cube, and  this  square,  and  so  on. Then  you  have  to  do  some  calculation to  get  rational  function. Then  the  numerator  will  be  this. From  this  step  to  this  step, not  of  calculations  are  involved. Now  let's  look  at  the  roots of  this  numerator. You  can  apply  the  rout  array. I  believe  you  just use  the  continuous  control  system. You  form  the  rout  array. Now  this  is  f  polynomial  in W.  You  use  the  highest  order coefficient  here  is  one, jump  one  term,  you  get  square. Jump  one,  you  get  this  21. For  this  row,  you  use the  third  order  coefficient, then  jump  one,  you  get  this. Then  from  this  two  row, you  come  from  the  s  square  row. Then  from  this  two  row, you  get  this  and  finally  you  have  this. That's  the  routs  array. Now,  you  look  at  the  first  corner. Of  this  rosy. You  can  see  there  is  no  change  in  the  sign or  the  sign  of the  first  column  changed  zero  times. You  have  no  root  on the  right  half  plane.  The  system  is  stable. Now,  let  me  make some  remarks  about  the  two  methods. Jury  test  cannot  tell you  about  the  number  of  unstable  roots. But  if  you  use  roots  or  rems, you  can  tell  the  number  of  unstable  roots. For  example,  if  the  roots, the  sign  here  change  once, they  have  one  root  on  the  right  hot  plane. You  have  the  sign  of  the first  colon  change  twice. They  have  two  roots  and  the  right  hot  plane, which  means  you  have two  roots  in  the  Z  plane, or  you  have  two  roots outside  the  unit  circle. This  is  the  first  remark. That  means  if  you  just  test, you  just  can  tell  the  stability. That  is  whether  the  system  is  stable  or  not. For  rows  array,  you can  also  tell  the  stability. Besides  this,  you  can  also  tell harmony  roots  are  unstable. But  jury  test  is  simple  in  calculation. You  don't  have  to  do  lots  of calculation  by  this  mapping. Because  you  need  to spend  lots  of  time  in  the  computation, we  don't  have  such  question  in  the  exam. You  just  need  to  know  the  jury  test. Next  is  about  performance. As  I  mentioned  in  the  first  lecture, when  we  study  control  system, we  have  design  and  analysis. For  both  deign  analysis, you  have  three  important  requirements. First,  stability. Yeah,  we  have  to  consider  stability. When  you  design  your  conner, you  should  ensure  your  system  to  be  stable. Second  is  the  twen  performance. Serve  is  the  steed  state  performance. Twan  performance  is  difficult to  study  or  to  calculate  manually. We  just  give  you  some  definitions  here. For  example,  for  this  response to  a  unit  step  input, We  have  the  concept  of rise  time  overshoot  and  the  stonin  time. Just  now  I  already  mentioned  the  stonin  time. Here  is  a  2%  acetonine,  2%  ostonine  time. Those  specifications we  quantify  the  transient  response. You  have  the  indication  of  how stable  your  system  is  based  on  the  overshoot. You  have  the  indication  of  the  speed  of response  by  rise  time  or  set  time. Now,  for  ste  state  response, we  have  the  accuracy  of  your  system. S  state  means  when  time  go  to  infinity. What's  your  final  output  is? For  both  cases,  you should  have  your  system  to  be  stable. If  your  system  is  unstable, don't  talk  about  such  specifications. As  I  just  mentioned,  for  td  response, you  have  to  use  computational  tool to  fund  the  tuner  response. For  example,  metal,  we  had some  examples  earlier  to fund  the  tanden  response. Here,  we  don't  Study  trans  response. We  just  have  these  definitions. Now,  we  analyze  CDS  performance. Here,  we  will  have  three  test  inputs. That  means  our  input  can  be  step  input, can  be  ramp  input, can  be  acceleration,  input. For  continuous  time  system, when  you  consider  penop  transfer  function, open  loop,  for  example, in  this  case,  this  is  a  closed  loop. For  open  of  means  you  have  opened  this. The  open  loop  transfer  function  here  is  just g  z  times  H  z. That's  the  open  loop. For  continuous  time  system, we  have  the  definition  of  type  of  system. In  continuous  time  system, you  have  GS  time  Hes. Maybe  you  can  write  G  times  h  in  this  form. In  this  way,  you  have  integrator  here. The  number  of  integrator  is  n. This  is  called  type  n  system. Yeah,  of  course,  not  integrator, you  have  zeros,  you  have  poles. For  integrator,  the  pole  is  at  the  region. Similarly,  for  our  discrete  time  system, we  consider  gs  this  penup  transfer  function. You  can  write  this  GH  Z, depends  on  your  given  system. Sometimes  you  can  write  GZ  separately. Sometimes  GH  cannot  be  separated. For  example,  here,  you have  this  open  transfer  function. In  this  form,  this is  the  number  of  integrators, which  is  ca  n. This  is  a  type  n  system  also. Of  course,  your  BZ  and  A  Z  shouldn't  have Factor,  which  is  z  minus  one. That  means  Bz  cannot have  zero  at  z  equals  one. A  Z  cannot  be  cannot  have pole  A  Z  cannot have  a  root  at  the  z  equals  one. In  other  words,  you  have  zero  here, that  or  cancel  out  this. You  have  to  simplify  that  in  the  case. This  is  a  final  simplify  the  form. B  Z  and  Az  shouldn't  have  root  at z  equals  one  when  you determine  the  type  of  the  system. This  is  the  definition. Now,  let's  consider  this  system. For  this  system,  you have  two  the  transfer  function, and  then  use  the  panal  value serm  to  check  the  panal  value. Again,  For  this  part, we  assume  the  system  is  stable. The  actual  18  er, which  is  this  here, it  will  be  RT  man  based  on  this  diagram. Then  the  corresponding  z  transform  or  EZ, which  is  R  Z  manus  Z. The  arrow  is  found  to  be  e  t,  go  to  infinity. This  is  obtained  by  final  value  theorem. Now  this  is  one  minor  z  inverse  time this  is  here, W  z  tends  to  one. That's  how  we  find  the  final  error. Now,  we  do  some  calculation  for  this  easy. Based  on  the  diagram  here, you  see  this  diagram,  es  is  minus  Z. But  based  on  this  diagram, B  two,  G  Z  time  g.  G  H  means  this  spot. You  have  sep  rocks  here. That  is  the  z  transform  crispond  li into  the  product  of  this  se. This  is  your  GHZ  from  the  diagram. Because  this  is  a  zero  order  hold. This  block  will  give  you  one  minor  z  inverse. Then  this  one  over  is  combined  with  this  two. You  have  GPH  div. You  find  a  corresponding  z  transform of  this  nonproran,  using  the  table. After  that,  times  one  minor  z  inverse, you  get  this  GH  Z. That's  how  you  get  this  GH  Z. Then  solving  this  equation, you  get  a  Z.  That's  the  Z. Now,  to  get  ESS, you  just  apply  this  final  value  theory by  substituting  this  into  the  formula  here. This  is  the  general  formula. Now  let's  consider  the  three  typical  inputs. One  is  step,  unit  step  input, second  one  is  a  unit  ramp, third  one  is  unit  acceleration  input. Yeah.  I  this. Now  I  will  use  this former  in  the  subsequent  part. Now,  if  your  input  is  a  unit  step  input, we  have  the  definition  of a  static  position  error  constant. In  this  case,  your  R  Z,  this  R  Z  here. With  this  unit  step  input, it  will  be  1/100  inverse. You  substitute  this  R  into  this  former. You  have  this  result.  Yeah. Basically,  one  minors  z inverse  cancel  with  this.  You  have  this  lift. Okay?  And  when  you take  a  mit  of  this  is  equivalent  to  this. Now  we  have  a  definition of  the  position  error  const  KP. This  is  defined  as  a  position  error  constant. Then  your  final  status  er  will be  equal  1/1  plus  P  with  this  definition. Your  KP  has  different  values depending  on  your  GH  Z. Yeah.  Remember,  your  GH  Z is  written  in  this  form  here. I  is  zero.  No  them  is, is  type  zero  system. If  zero,  I  is  zero, when  you  take  thismit, tends  to  one,  because you  consider  this  limit,  GH,  Z. It  will  be  just  B  one  over  A  one. In  this  case,  that's a  final  number  because  of  this  station  here. In  this  case,  your  arrow  is  not  zero. It  will  be  1/1  plus  KP. KP  will  be  equal  to  this. Now,  if  n  is  equ  to  one  or  bigger  than  one. What  is  this  KP? If  this  is  one,  when  is  t  one, that  will  go  to  infinity. This  will  be  infinity  in  this  case. If  a  KP  is  infinity, your  ESS  will  be  zero. If  you  want  to  have  zero  sus  ero, when  your  input  is  a  unit  step  input. You  transfer  function. Pup  transfer  function  should have  at  least  one  integrator. Otherwise,  you  cannot  have  zero  status. That's  for  the  first  satiation. Second  satiation  is  that you  have  a  unit  ramp  input. In  this  case,  your  Z  or  BDs. I  substitute  this  R  Z  into  the  former  here. This  is  the  gener  former. You'll  have  this  result. That's  the  gener  former. R  z  is  Q  to  that. In  this  case,  this  one  minor  z  inverse cancel  one  of  this  square  here. Dumertor  is  t  Z  inverse,  that's  this. Then  you  have  one  factor  here. This  factor  is  multiplied  to these  two  terms  in  the  denumerator. You  have  these  two  terms. One  times  this  you  this. Then  this  time  that  is  the  first  term. When  turns  to  one,  Numerator  or  turns  to  t, this  will  go  to  zero. You  just  have  this  lift, and  this  can  be  rewritten  in  this  foam. T  is  moved  to  the  position  here. Now,  this  is  the  definition of  velocity  arrow  constant. This  is  the  velocity  er  constant, which  is  with  this  definition, S  arrow  will  be  one  of  KV. Again,  you  can  compute KV  for  different  type  of  system. In  fact,  if  you  have  a  zero  integrator, your  KV,  What  is  the  KV  in  this  case? V  zero.  Then  this  will  be  infinite. If  you  have  one  integrator, that  is  if  n  is  one, Then  this  one  min  z  inverse  or  cons  this. Then  you  have  a  constant  KV. We  have  a  non  zero, which  is  one  over  KV. If  this  is  bigger  than  one, for  example  two  and  above, then  KV  will  be  infinity. Then  you  have  zero. If  you  want  to  track  a  ramp  input, your  transverse  fun  should have  at  least  two  integrator. Okay. For  the  case,  if  you  have static  acceleration, unitary  acceleration  input, your  R  z  will  be  this, then  you  do  a  calculation  by substituting  R  Z  into this  general  formula,  you  get  this. Of  course,  you  have this  cube  in  the  denomerator. One  factor  is.  You  have  a  square  lift. After  taking  the  d  met, that  z  tends  to  one,  you  get  this  answer. Then  you  have  this Denominator.  This  denominator is  defined  as  KA. You  can  also  use  this  to  calculate KA  for  different  type  of  system. And  With  this, we  have  the  summary  table  here. That  means,  for  different  type  of  system, and  the  arrow  in response  to  different  inputs, you  have  different  answers  here. For  example,  for  nstp  input, if  it  type  zero, you  have  this  Ss. For  type  one  or  above,  you  have  zero. For  ramp  input,  your  KV  or be  infinity  for  type  zero  system. Your  KV  will  be  a  constant  for  type  one, KV  will  be  infinity  for  type  two  sil. Again,  this  is  for  our  system  chewing  here. Yeah.  Our  result  summarized  in this  table  is  for  this  system. If  you  have  other  type  of  system, then  you  have  to  do  similar  analysis. Again,  from  this,  the  ear we  are  considering  is  the  actual  eating, not  the  tracking  ear. If  H  is  one,  then  is  the  tracking  year. For  unit  feedback, tracking  will  be  the same  as  the  actual  eating  year. Yeah,  you  may  have  some  other  type  of other  configurations  of  your  system  like this  for  the  definition of  the  position  ero  constant. You  can  use  the  similar  analysis  method  to get  these  definitions for  each  configuration  here. That's  the  response  to  input. In  some  case,  you  may  have disturbance  to  the  system. For  example,  you  have this  feedback  control  system, you  have  a  disturbance  entering the  system  from  this  position. In  this  case,  if  you  want  to  fund  the  output, you  have  to  use  superposition. Because  this  is  a  linear  system, so  you  can  apply  superposition. Superposition  means  you  fund  the  response  CZ, N  zero,  that  you find  the  response  to  the  reference  input. Then  you  have another  response  to  the  disturbance. In  this  case,  your  reference  input  is  zero, you  fund  the  response  C  Z in  response  to  this  N  Z.  Yeah. Earlier,  we  have  analyzed how  in  response  to  R.  Here, we  just  consider  C  in response  to  n.  In  this  case, our  R  will  be  considered  as  zero. How  do  we  find  the  C  Z in  terms  of  N  Z  in  this  case? Yeah,  this  diagram  looks  complicated. We  do  some  manipulation  to convert  this  diagram  into  a  free  medial  form. We  consider  n  as a  signal  input  to  the  system. Then  from  here,  We just  move  this  smation  to  here. Yeah,  because  this  is  zero. This  has  been  rechanged. This  smation  here  has  been  rechanged. From  n,  you  have  g  here, and  then  you  have  this  C. Then  from  C,  you  have  this  feedback. We  have  netive  sign  here.  Yeah,  this  is  zero. This  neative  sign  is  moved  to  here. You  have  this  netive  feedback. This  diagram  can  be  changed  to  this  diagram. From  this  diagram,  you  can  find your  C,  one  r  is  zero. Our  purpose  is  to  find the  tracking  area  in  this  case, because  this  is  a  unit  feedback. What  is  the  tracking  area? Tracking  ero  is  r  min C.  We  don't  track  the  disturbance. We  will  track  this.  Based  on  this, we  do  some  calculation  for  the  tracking  area. From  this  diagram,  O  tracking  o is  r  minus  c  as  you  can  see. In  this  case,  R  r  is  zero because  we're  applying  superposition. Z  is  r  minus  c, and  R  zero  is  a  netive C.  How  do  you  find  C  from  this  diagram? C  is  Native  at  is, G  over  one  plus  g, g.  G  actually  is  the  contro  here. Then  times  z  here. This  is  the  arroz  in  terms  of  z  transform. Now,  based  on  this  case, you  can  see  that  if  this G  times  G  Z  is  much  bigger  than  one. I  mean,  the  magnitude  of this  complex  function  is much  bigger  than  one, then  you  can  ignore  this  one. In  that  case,  if  this  is  ignored, then  G  Z  is approximately  equal  negative  one  of  GD  and  z. This  G  is  canceled  out. We  have  this  conclusion. If  you  have  a  large  game  for  this  cont, GD  is  contoner,  then  you  have a  smaller  checking  for  this  system. When  you  design  your  controller, if  you  want  to  have  a  more accurate  response  in  the  state. You  should  choose  dg  gain  for  your  consoler. Of  course,  your  dg  gain should  ensure  stability. Sometimes  if  your  gain  is  too  big, like  in  your  previous  example, your  system  is  unstable. Under  the  condition  that your  system  is  stable, you  can  choose  a  gain  for  your  GD. Now  let's  have  a  spatial  case. If  this  G,  this  GD  here. Has  integrator. That  is,  this  transfer  function, GD  has  pole  at  z  equals  one. This  transfer  function,  that's  the  plan. G  Z  has  no  zero  at  z  equals  one. Yeah,  because  if  you  have  zero, zero  will  cancel  out  the  pole  of  GD. You  shouldn't  allow  G to  have  zero  at  equals  one. Otherwise,  you  will  have a  p  zero  cancllation. Under  this  condition,  if the  disturbance  here  is  constant. Then  this  state  tracking  will  be  zero. That's  the  result  for  this  satiation. Your  GD  has  an  integrator, G  Z  has  zero  at  z  equals  one. This  n  is  a  constant. Then  at  the  state,  the  tracking. That  is  this  tracking  here  is  zero. This  means  you  can  use this  contoner  to  reject  the  disturbance. Let's  do  a  proof. With  this  condition,  you  can write  your  GD  in  this  form. Basically,  you  factorize  z  minors one  out  because  you  have  integrator. If  you  factorize  that  out, your  GD  the  remaining  part, or  has  no  zero  at  z  equals  one. Otherwise,  this  zero  is  cons  with  that. That's  for  the  cont  representation. We  just  divide  the  z in  both  numerator  and denomeror,  you  get  this. Now,  I'll  assume  the  disturbance here  is  a  constant  C, because  this  is  the  disturbance. This  constant  has  a  value  C  here. In  this  case,  your  z  or  b  to  this. C  divided  by  this,  C  is  a  constant. That's  the  z  transform of  this  disturbance  in  this  case. Okay?  Now,  you  just  substitute  this  result into  this  formula  here in  this  formula  has  no  approximation. You  do  a  substitution. And  apply  the  final  value  serrem. You  have  this. You  just  have  one  Z  inverse, CV  here,  and  the  Z is  showing  here  can  be  written  in  this  foam. After  you  substitute  GD, which  is  GD  hat  divid  by  this. That's  your  GD,  and this  is  G.  That's  your  G  here. Your  numerator  also  has  G, and  this  is  C  divid  by  this. Now,  You  have  one  minor  inverse  here, you  have  one  minor  z  inverse  here. But  you  have  the  inverse  here. What  do  you  do  is  to  multiply. Yeah,  this  one  minor  the  inverse into  Each  of  these  two  terms. This  time  that,  you  have one  miner  verse,  this  coms  out. You  have  gha,  z  inverse  g. The  numerator  is  one  miner  verse neative  G  times  C, C  is  a  constant.  Now  you  take  a  limit. This  is  numerator  is  zero. G  zero  is  no  zero, you  have  Actually  G  one, z  tends  to  one,  that's  zero, G  one  is  no  zero. This  is  zero,  and  this  is  one, this  is  G  one,  as  GD  had  one. This  denominator  is  no  zero, but  neumator  is  zero,  then  you  have  zero. Our  result  is  approved. Okay?  We  have  this  very  important  result. If  this  is  a  constant  disturbance, you  have  integrator  here, you  have  no  zero  in  the  plant. Then  finally,  your  tracking error  will  be  zero. Even  if  you  have  disturbance  here. Eventually,  your  feedback  control  system will  reject  the  disturbance. But  this  is  in  steed  state. Of  course,  the  disturbance has  an  effect  during the  transition  period.  Yeah. This  is  the  first  part  and we  have  a  short  break. Of  the  led,  we  have  crease. You  have  to  come  back  in  t  minutes. We  have  to  sit  at the  designed  region  by  A  25. Okay. Okay,  so  this is  the  seating  arrangement. Group  one,  here.  Group  two, this  region,  group  three,  the  behind. Okay? To  know  if  this  table  was  given. I  say  the  necessary  pair would  be  g.  Is  the  table. Yeah,  a  table  is  not  given. Yeah,  we  have  a. Okay,  please  do  not  turn  over  the  paper. Yeah.  We  will  start  at eight.  Yeah,  this  is  the  time. Please  do  not  start. We  start  at  the  A  30. Do  not  turn  over  the  page. Turn  over  the  paper.  When  you submit  your  answer  set,  please  show  your. Yeah,  we  will  take  attendance when  you  submit  answers. Okay,  has  everybody  get  the  paper? Yeah,  we  have  1  minute  to  start. Okay.  Stop. Okay. Please  stop  writing  and submit  your  answers  to the  respective  group,  group  be. H h h
