Okay.  Good  evening. Everybody.  Welcome  to the  course  e62  oh  three. We  didn't  have  a  lecture  last  week  because  of the  National  Day  holiday. I  believe  you  watch the  recorded  video  lecture. However,  I  still  need  to introduce  myself  to  you. Yeah.  My  name  is  Win, and  I'm  a  professor  in  the  School  of  TPE. I'm  one  of  the  ure for  this  subject  actually  have  two  lectures. I'm  one  of  them. If  you  encounter  any  difficulty, or  you  have  any  question regarding  this  subject  in  my  part, I  will  be  in  this  office  for  you  to  contact. But  you  can  also  send  me  an  e  mail. This  is  my  e  mail  address. So  you  can  send your  question  to  me  through  this  e  mail. In  case,  we  can answer  this  question  through  e  mail, then  it  will  be  fine. However,  if  we have  some  mathematical  derivations. Sometimes  it's  not  easy to  answer  through  e  mail. In  that  case,  you  need  to  go to  my  office.  Yeah. Sometimes  you  can  also  ask  me  after the  net  in  each  week. This  is  about  me. I  think  I  also  need  to point  out  the  assessment  scheme. Yeah  which  was  also  showing  in  the  recorded. You  can  see  that. We  have  both  continuous  assessment and  also  final  exam. For  the  continuous  assessment, we  have  three  quiz. F,  actually  I  have  two  parts  in  my  nature. For  the  first  part,  which  will be  covered  in  the  first  four  weeks. We  have  first  quiz, which  will  be  conducted  in  week  four. Yeah,  I  will  send  you  more details  later  on  for  this. Then  for  quiz  two, it  will  be  arranged  by  Professor  Lee. The  other  lecture  of  this  subject. Then  after  P  finished  his  lecture, I  will  come  back  to Consider  pulse  three  of  nature. In  this  case,  at  the  end  of  the  pulse  three, I  will  have  the  third  quiz. These  are  the  weightages showing  in  each  of  the  quizzes. For  the  final  exam,  we  have  four  quiz, and  the  exam  paper, We  lost  for  3  hours. Each  question  will  be  will  have  25  marks. That's  our  assessment  scheme. Previously,  in  the  recorded  lecture, we  started  z  one. Now  I  will  continue  with  inverse  z  transform. This  is  the  topic  to  be  considered  today. The  question  is  this,  you are  given  the  z  transform  x  z. Then  you  have  to  fund the  corresponding  time  function,  x  k. That's  called  inverse  z  transform. For  z  transform,  you  are  given  x k  or  x  t  or  x  Kt. Then  you  find  the  corresponding  z  transform. Now,  when  you  find  the  inverse  z  transform, you  cannot  find  x  t. You  can  either  fund  x  k or  x  KT  if  the  sampling  period  is  given. Actually,  for  the  same  z  transform, you  may  have  many  answers  for x  K  as  illustrated  in  this  diagram  here. If  you  are  giving  x  z, when  you  are  asked  to  fund  x  k  or  X  K, then  you  should  get  the  answer. How  do  we  fund  this  x  K  or  x  KT? We  have  four  methods  showing  here. One  is  called  direct  division  method. That  is  a  non  deviation. The  second  method  is  a  computational  method. The  third  one  is  a partial  fraction  expansion  method, and  the  final  we have  inversion  integral  method. I  will  through  each  of  this  method  today. First,  let's  consider  the  first  method, direct  division  method. Actually,  this  method  is  just  based  on the  definition  of  z  transform. Yeah,  this  is  the  definition  of  Z  transform. You  can  see  that. This  zs  form  can  be  expanded  in  this  form. For  example,  based  on  this  definition here  or  this  definition,  2.1  here. You  can  expand  the  smation  here, to  have  this  infinite  number of  terms  added  to  the  geezer. It's  actually  a  series. You  can  see,  as  I  said, our  purpose  is  to  find  X  KT. You  can  see  from  this  result, the  coefficient  of  Z  is  K. If  you  can  write  your  x  in this  form  and  you  look  for  the  co  of  Z, then  you  get  X  KT. For  example,  10,  you have  this  term,  you  get  x  zero, 01,  then  you  get  x  t.  We  two, you  get  x2t,  and  so  one. That's  the  first  mesod called  long  division  mystery. That's  for  the  case  one time  when  the  sampling  period  is  given. If  you  don't  have  the  sampling  period, you  have  to  use  the  second  definition  here. For  this  case,  you  can  get  x  k.  By considering  the  coefficient  of  z k.  This  is  the  idea. What  do  you  do  is  to  expand  x z  as  a  series  in  z  inverse, inc  x  KT  or  x  k. Please  on  this  result. Normally,  our  X  Z is  a  rational  function  like  this. You  have  a  denominator  with  order  n, you  have  a  numerator  with  order. You  can  see  in  this  two  expressions, they  are  represented  in  terms  of  z  inverse. You  have  to  do  some  manipulation or  the  given  x  Z. Basically,  you  just  divide  z  p  n in  both  numerator  and  the  denomerator. You  can  rewrite  this  given  x  Z  in  this  form. If  you  divide  Z  p  n,  you  get  one  here. For  this  term,  it  will  be  A  one, inverse,  and  this  term  will  be  An  z  inverse. For  the  num  reader,  you  have  this  results. After  you  divide  z  n.  You  have this  Now  this  Standard  form, you  do  polynomial  divation, to  have  this  answer. We  have  to  know  how  to do  polynomial  division. That's  the  general  approach. Now,  I  will  show  you  example. I  just  put  this  result  here. Now  let's  look  at  the  example  to fund  our  K  or  X  KT. Now  you're  given  this  z  transform  X  Z. The  sampling  period  is  not  given, so  you  just  need  to  find  x  k. You  don't  have  to  find  all  k from  zero  to  infinite. You  can  see  this  is  starting from  zero  to  infinite. Actually,  in  this  size, or  in  this  example, you  just  need  to  find  x  zero, x  one,  x  two,  x  three,  and  x. You  just  need  to  find  five values  for  your  x  k. Now  you  follow  this  idea  here. Yeah,  that's  your  x  z. This  is  a  second  z  transform. The  denumator  is  a  sec  under  water. Numerator  is  first  water. You  divide  a  z  square. In  both  numerator  and denominator,  you  get  this. Of  course,  before  you  do  division, you  can  expand  the  denominator to  get  the  polynomal. You  have  one  here,  then  this is  next  1.2  z  inverse, then  plus  0.2  z  inverse  square. For  the  numerator,  if  you  divide  z  square, you  have  ten  z  inverse plus  five  inverse  square. That  in  this  phone. Here.  Now  you  do  non  division  in  order  to fund  your  z  in  this  expansion. Now  we  do  division. Be  them  is  this, just  write  the  neumter here  and  denominator  is  this. You  do  the  division  of this  neumor  by  this  denominator. You  should  know  how  to  do  long  division for  polynomials. Now  this  is  one  and  here  is  ten  z  inverse. We  want  to  cancel  out  this  ten  inverse. You  get  this  qu, not  this,  z  inverse, divide  by  one,  you  get  ten  z  inverse. That's  the  equation  when  you divide  one  here  by  this. You  can  see  this polynomial  multiply  z  inverse, you  get  this  answer. On  time  that,  you  get  ten  z  inverse. Negative  1.2  z  inverse  time  this, you  get  negative  12  z  inverse  square. 0.2,  the  inverse  square  time  this, you  get  two,  inverse  cube. Now  you  do  subtraction. Yeah,  because  you  are  doing  tvsion. This  one  minors  this. This  difference  is  zero. That's  the  purpose  of using  this  equation  here. Then  this  manors  this, you  get  17  z  inverse  square. Then  you  have  zero  here, zero  minus  two  ver  cube,  you  get  this. You  have  this  remainder  when this  polynomial  divide  by this  polynomial  with  this  equation. Now  this  one  should  divide  by  this. This  17  z  inver  square, divide  by  one,  you  get  the 17  z  inverse  square. This  is  the  que.  Now,  this multiply  this  polynomial, you  get  this  answer. You  just  do  a  product  between  this  term and  this  the  nominator,  you  get  this  answer. Then  this  minors  this, you  get  this  reminder. You  just  continue  in  this  process. Here,  you  get  Native  two  inverse  cube, minors  negative  20.4  z  inverse  cube, you  get  positive  18.4  z  inverse  cube. You  have  zero  here, so  zero  minors  that,  you  get  this. Then  this  one  divide  by  that,  you  get  this. Then  this  time,  not  the  denominator, you  get  this  answer. Then  you  do  subjection, you  get  this  remainder. Yeah,  just  continue  until  until  z  e  four. Because  in  the  example  here, you  just  need  to  find out  xk4k  from  zero  up  to  four. You  can  stop  here  to  this  term. In  other  words,  this  x  z can  be  written  in  this  form. You  have  this  equation. You  just  four  terms  here, and  you  don't  worry  about  the  remaining  part, plus  some  remaining  parts plus  three  dots  here. That  means  you  have  minimal  terms. Based  on  this  result, you  look  at  the  coefficient  of  each  term. You  can  have  your  inverse  z  transform for  x  k.  You  get  this  table. Four  k  0-4,  you  have  this  x  k. You  can  see  here,  you  don't have  the  constant  term, you  see,  based  on  the  definition  here. For  the  constant  term,  is  x  zero. We  don't  have  this  constant  term. W  k  is  zero  that's  zero. Then  is  one,  you  have  z  inverse  here, then  your  x  one  or  b  ten. Wenk  is  two,  your  X  two  is  17. W  K  three,  your  that  is  X  three  will  be  18.4. Then  as  four  like  this, then  the  coefficient  is  18.68. We  have  f  the  answers required  by  this  example. That's  how  we  funded the  university  transform  by  non  division. Normally,  you  cannot  get a  closed  form  expression. As  you  can  see,  you  have many  terms  with  many  swing  here. You  can  get  your  x  k for  a  number  of  k  values  like  four  k  0-4. Closed  form  means  you have  a  mathematical  expression. This  is  not  a  mathematical  expression. You  just  have  this  table  to list  your  x  k.  However, in  some  special  case, you  can  still  get  close to  fall  mathematical  expression. For  example,  if  your  x  is  this, then  you  can  see  that. This  is  a  finite  power  series  in  the  inverse. You  have  this  inverse  z  transform, based  on  this  result. This  is  the  constant  term, W  k  is  zero,  x, x  zero  is  one,  W  W  k  is  one, x  one  or  b  two. Two,  then  x  three, k  is  three,  the  x  three  or  four. You  don't  have  remaining  terms. For  other  k  values, that  is  four  k  g  to  four,  you  have  zero. Yeah. In  this  way,  you  can  write the  mathematical  expression  for this  answer,  swing  in  the  table. That  is,  you  can  have  your  x  like  this. That's  one,  one  K  zero. That's  two  k  one, three  k  two,  four, k  is  three  and  zero  k  B  ground  equ  four. This  is  a  close  to  form. Yeah.  You  have  a  mathematical  expression for  your  x  for  k  from  zero  to  infinity. This  is  just  for  a  special  case. We  have  fan  power  series  in  the  inverse. That's  the  first  approach. Now,  let's  look  at  the  second  approach. What  is  the  second  approach? Second  approach  is  computational  Mr.. Yeah. You  have  a  You have  to  use  computational  tool to  fund  your  inverse  Z  transform. How  do  we  do  that? We  illustrate  this  using  example. Actually,  with  this  method, we  have  two  approaches  also. Now  we  consider  a  given  for  s  here. In  this  case,  you  have  to  fund the  inverses  of  G  Z. That  is,  you  may  have  to  find  your  GK. In  this  case,  the  sampling period  is  not  given. So  you  have  to  find  the  inverse  D  transform of  g,  which  is  GK. The  problem  is  this.  This  is  given. Therefore,  the  question  is  to  find  GK, which  is  the  z  transform. Of  GZ.  How  do  we  do  this? You  can  also  use  long  division as  we  did.  T  now. For  computational  tool or  computational  method, you  can  use  program  or comp  existing  so  fit  package. What  do  we  do  here  is  this. You  use  this  form  to  construct a  system.  What  do  we  do  is  this. You  construct  a  system  with  GZ, as  the  transfer  function  of  the  system. When  you  consider  a  system, you  have  a  input,  you  have  a  output. Suppose  the  z  of  the  input  is  x, then  the  corresponding  output  or  y  z. You  know  based  on our  continuous  transfer  functions  concept, we  also  have  the  result here  for  discrete  time  system. Your  output  y  z  should  be  equ  to  gz. Times. That's  from  the  system  theory. Now, computational  miss  means  you  want  to  fund your  output  from  the  system. How  do  we  fund  the  GK  here? We  have  to  choose  our  input. We  have  to  choose  a  input  to  make this  y  z  be  the same  as  G  Z.  How  do  we  do  that? This  is  possible.  If  your  x  z  is  one, then  you  should  have  y  z  equals  G  Z,  correct? We  have  freedom  to  choose  our  input. Therefore,  we  need  to choose  input  signal  here, such  that  the  z  transform  is  one. Then  from  this  system, you  just  find  out  the  output. The  output,  of  course,  is  in  time  domain. In  this  case,  the  output  will  be  like  y  k. Of  course,  the  time  domain here  for  X  should  have  x  k  here. In  this  case,  your  y  k would  be  the  same  as  your  g K.  That's  how  you get  this  inverse  Z transform  if  you  get  the  y  k. Now,  what  is  the  signal? What  is  your  x  such  that  x  z  is  one? You  look  at  the  z  transform  table. We  have  a  special  function. Look  at  this  ones  Form  table,  h  here. You  should  know  how  to  use  the  table  here. If  x  is  one, your  x  k  should  be  a  Tirta  function, which  is  defined  in  s. Now  this  wing  K  is  zero, the  value  is  one,  but the  wing  K  is  no  zero,  the  value  is  zero. We  will  choose  such  an  input. For  the  construct  system. This  is  the  input  to  be  chosen. Not  is  our  x  k  is  chosen  to  be  this. Yeah,  because  this  function, this  time  domain  function  will  give you  this  is  z  transform. In  this  way,  you  can  have  this  output, y  K,  which  is  the  same  as  your  GK. This  is  the  idea  to  fund  our  GK. Now  let's  do  that  for  this  example. As  I  just  mentioned,  with  this  function? Yeah,  I  show  you  from  this. With  this  function,  your  x  is  one, therefore,  y  z  is  same  as  GZ,  which  is  this. We  are  going  to  find  out  the  output  y k.  You  have  to  find this  using  computational  package. So  package. One  way  is  to  use  matlab. I  believe  you  know  what  is  the  matlab. To  use  the  matlab. You  have  this  transfer  function. I  think  when  you  use  the  metab, this  transfer  function  should  be  in terms  of  z  instead  of  z  inverse. You  have  to  do  some  conversion  here  to convert  this  z  transform  to  this. What  you  do  is  two  times  z square  in  both  numer  denme. You  have  this  transfer  function, that's  your  g  Z. That's  this  Z. Now  we  have  this  matlab  approach. Of  course,  this  approach  will  not  be exam  because  during  exam, we  don't  have  matlab  available. You  should  know  how  to  use  this  matlab. Now,  we  have  this  matlab  command. What  do  we  do  is to  program  this  transfer  function. To  have  this  system  constructed. In  this  case,  you  define  two  vectors. One  is  called  NUM. That  means  numerator. One  is  DN,  m  is  the  nominator. You  just  put  the  coefficient. Of  the  gnomeor,  and  the  coefficient  of numerator  as  the  components of  the  two  vectors. For  example,  for  the  gnomeor, you  can  see  the  coefficient  here  is  one, this  is  negative  1.53  27,  that's  0.6  607. The  vector.  This  is the  vector  containing  the  coefficiency  here. For  the  numerator  is  first  order. For  the  second  order  term  is  zero, and  these  are  the  two  coefficients  here. Okay. That's  how  we  get  this  transfer  function, constructed,  use  a  metalab. We  have  to  construct  input. What  is  our  input?  Input  is  this. Your  input  is  one,  one  k  zero. For  others,  is  zero. This  is  you  define  vector  x. The  first  component  is  one. Yeah  because  that  component is  corresponding  to  k  zero. Then  maybe  we  want  to  find  x  k  0-40. Now  we  just  construct the  vectors  are  using  this  zeros. Which  has  40  components from  position  one  to  position  40. You  have  40  zeros  in  this  vector. That's  the  input,  construct  from  here. Now,  you  want  to  get  output, y,  which  is  the  same  as  our  K. That's  your  immersed  transform. If  you  recall  Matlab, you  can  have  this  command. That  is  just  this  command  filter, n  d  n  with  input  x. Then  you  run  your  mat  lab. You  get  this  answer.  That's  the  output  y. Based  on  this  table. Based  on  this  result  here. You  can  have  your  z  transform. Actually,  maybe  the  notation is  a  bit  misleading. In  fact,  this  should  be our  inverse  Z  transform  GP. Which  is  the  same  as  y  k  in  this  case. This  is  the  y,  y  k, four  k  from  zero  of  240. You  can  see  here,  W  k  is  zero,  R  y  is  zero. W  K  is  one,  y  is  d. W  two,  y  is  0.376. You  can  continue.  You  get this  until  40,  you  get  this  answer. This  is  how  you  find inverse  transform  for  the  given  Z  transform. For  example,  for  this  GZ, you  can  find  a  GK  to  be  this. That's  the  first  approach. W  is  to  use  Matla. You  just  do  a  programming  as  shown  here. It's  very  easy  programming, you  get  input  Numerator denominator  and  then  you  have  this  one. You  don't  have  to  do  long  division. Next  approach is  difference  equation  approach. In  this  case,  you  don't  have to  do  programming  or  you  can  do  computation. Based  on  this  system, as  I  just  mentioned, we  still  need  to  construct  a  system. Based  on  this  construct  system, your  GZ  is  actually  y  Z  divided  by  X.  Yeah, this  is  the  Z,  Z  transform  of  the  output, divid  by  z  transform  of  the  input. This  y  z  divid  by  this  x  z  equals this  given  z  transform. Then  you  do  a  cross  product. If  you  do  a  cross  product, you  get  this  answer. This  numerator  times  y  Z,  or, this  denominator  times  y  Z, or  two,  this  numerator  times  x  z. This  is  just  cross  product. Now,  you  multiply  y  z  inside. The  bracket,  you  get  three  terms. Also  you  multiple  XX  into  the  bracket, you  get  two  terms. Then  you  take  a  inverse  this  transform. Of  course,  you  have to  use  the  shifting  serim. Of  z  transform. You  get  this  answer.  This  y  z, you  take  averse  z  transform, you  get  y  k.  For  the  con  term, you  have  z  inverse  times  y,  z. That  inverse  z  transform will  give  you  y  k  minus  one. This  z  inverse  squared  time  y,  z, you  will  have  y  k  minus two  as  inverse  d  transform. Similarly,  for  the  right  side, x  z  time,  you  get  z  inverse  x  z. When  you  take  an  inverse  d  transform, z  inverse  x  z  will  give  you  x  k  minus  one. This  will  give  you  x  k  minus. This  will  give  you  a  difference  equation. That's  why  it's  called difference  equation  approach. Now,  the  purpose  is  to  find Y  K  from  your  input  and  also  past  outputs. You  move  these  two  terms  to  the  site. You  get  your  Y  K  in  the  squa. Actually,  this  is,  this  Y  K  is  obtained. Based  on  past  values  of  Y, Y  one  and  Y  K  s  two. This  is  recursive,  and  also based  on  the  given  input. What  is  our  input? Our  input  should  be  this. We  are  going  to  use  the  same  concept  here. Your  X  k  s  like  this. K  zero,  that's  one  as  here. W  k  is  no  zero, that  is  one  bigger  zero, that  is  one,  two,  and  so  one, x  k  or  zero. How  about  y? Zero  for  net  k  because  this  is  a  coso  system. You  don't  have  output. Wink  is  negative. Now,  we  are  going  to  compute our  Y  K  using  this  expression. Wing  is  zero,  you  need  to  and  y  zero. Wing  k  is  zero,  you  have  y  zero. If  this  is  zero,  you  have  net  one. This  is  zero,  you  have  net  two. If  this  is  zero,  you  have  net  one, this  is  zero,  you  have  neto  two. Remember  this  results  here. F  net  k,  your  y  or  is  zero. This  two  is  zero  and  the  four  x  k, it  also  be  zero, four  k  different  from  zero. This  is  also  zero.  Therefore,  y  zero  is  zero. No.  You  need  to  compete  y  one. Y  one  means  is  ten  by  setting  k2b1. If  this  is  one,  then this  one  minus  one  will  be  zero, one  minus  two,  one, one  minus  one  here, zero,  one  minus  two,  next  one. Now,  y  zero.  What  is  y  zero, y  zero  is  calculate  here. You  substitute  this  zero  here.  You  get  zero. Based  on  this  result,  y  net  one  is  also  zero, x  is  zero  now  is  no  zero,  x  zero  is  one. You  have  to  use  this  value. To  compete  this  term, and  the  next  one  is  also  zero. Therefore,  you  do  a  calculation, it  will  be  0.4  67s.  That's  y  one. Y  two,  you  just  choose  k22. Then  this  is  two not  b  one,  this  will  be  zero. This  will  be  one, that  B  zero,  one  case  two. Now,  y  one  has  been  found  here. You  have  two  substates  y  one here  in  the  expression, y  zero  is  zero, so  you  have  two  subside  zero to  this  expression, x  one  on  x  one, x10,  or  quoting  to  this. And  x  zero  is  one, so  you  have  to  use  one  to  do  the  calculation. We  have  actually  two  non  zero  terms, this  one  and  this  one. Then  you  get  this  answer. You  just  continue  to compute  y  three,  Y  four,  and  so  one. I  think  the  answer  will  the  same  as  this. But  this  one,  you can  do  manual  calculation  during  exam. This  is  not.  Optional. Yeah.  This  is  a  bi  manual  calculation, as  just  mentioned,  for computational  tool,  you  can  do  program. Actually  you  can  program  this  equation. You  can  write  a  short  program  to  get your  Y  k  from  zero  to  any  value  you  wish. That's  the  difference  equation  approach. Again,  as  you  can  see, the  results  obtained  are  not  closed  form. You  can  see  like  this,  you  can have  a  table  showing  here. It's  not  close  for  mathematical  expression. If  you  want  to  get  a  close for  mathematical  expression, you  have  to  use  the  third  approach, which  is  a  partial  fraction  expansion  method. If  you  know  how  to  find the  inverse  nc  ts  form, you  can  use  the  same  idea  here. Basically,  your  split  the given  x  z  into  a  number  of  terms. So  that  you  can  find each  term  in  the  Z  transform  table. You  have  to  use  the  z  transform table,  in  this  case. You  can  see  you  have  reduced  X  Z  here. We  have  another  page. You  have  to  manu  plate,  this  Z, that  it  is  the  summation  of  those  terms. Then  you  can  use the  table  to  find  the  answer. That's  the  idea  to  do  this. When  we  do  partial  fraction  expansion, you  can  consider  two  cases. On  case,  is  to do  partial  fraction  expansion  for  devi  by  Z. For  both  cases,  we  will  do factorization  for  the  normal  liter  of  Z. So  that  you  can do  partial  fractioning  expansion. Yeah. Two  cases  means  you  can directly  do  partial  fracing  expansion  for Z  or  you  can consider  the  partial  fraction  expansion for  devi  by  Z. Yeah. We  will  consider  both  cases  here. Okay. Now,  Before  you  consider X  divid  by  z,  as  I  said, you  have  to  factorize this  denominator  into  factor  form  like  this. Now  we  assume  each  factor  is  a  simple  factor. That  means,  each  factor  will  give you  a  pole  and  this  pole  is  a  simple  pole. If  you  do  that,  when  you  do the  partial  friing  expansion  of  X  dvd  by  z, then  you  have  an  additional  factor. Do  n  factors.  That  is, you  have  a  factor  z  here. With  that  factor  z, you  have  a  term  here, and  then  for  each  of  this  n  factor, you  get  this  n  terms. I  believe  you  know  how  to  fund  A  zero  A  one and  this  can  be done  by  using  secondary  school  mathematics. I  think  we  have examples  to  fund  A  zero  A  one  and  A  n. You  should  know  how  to  fund. I  don't  have  to  repeat  here. This  is  x  d  by. Actually,  we  are  going  to  consider x  not  x  divided  by  z. In  this  case,  you  multiply  z  on  both  sides. You  get  this  answer. X  z  will  be  changed  to  this. Now  we  want  to  match  of  this  m  plus  one  term. You  have  m  plus  one  term. We  have  to  match  each  of them  with  the  z  transform  table  here. For  the  first  term  is, A  zero  is  a  constant. You  can  use  this. A  zero  is  just  a  zero  times  one. How  about  those  terms? You  can  see  those  terms  are  in  terms  of  z. Actually  in  the  z  transform  table, each  term  is  in  terms  of  z  inverse. We  have  to  do  manipulation, two  change  each  of this  n  term  to  a  form  in  of  z  inverse. Now  you  divide  in both  numerator  and  denominator. You  will  have  this.  Right? Okay. Now,  can  we  find each  of  this  term  in  the  table? Look  at  this  pf. This  one  is  possible, 1/1  minor  z  inverse. That's  not  the  general  case. You  can  see  here. We  have  P  one  in  front  of  this, we  have  P  two  in  front  of  a  P  one. If  a  P  one  is  one,  will  this. For  general  case,  if  P  one  is  not  one, can  we  find  such  a  term  here? Yeah,  we  don't  have  but  that's  complicated. Actually,  we  have  this  term  in  here. This  is  an  important  term. We  look  for  inverse  D  transform. This  is  frequently  used. You  compare  this  with  that  first  term. You  can  see  your  P  one  is  your  A. For  this  second  term,  your  P  two  is  this  A. What's  the  inverse  this  transform here,  is  a  k. Based  on  this  result, for  the  first  term  is  A  zero. Inverse  this  transform  is  a  zero  k. That  is  from  here.  For  the  rest  terms, you  need  to  use  this  answer. You  have  a  coefficient  A  one. You  move  this  to  the  front. Then  this  is  P  one.  This  will  be  p1k. That's  this. That's  an  important  term. Here,  second  term,  you  have  A  two, this  is  P  two  is  P two  to  part  of  k,  and  c  one. Here  you  can  see  why  we consider  the  partial  fraction  of  it  by. Because  with  this  consideration, when  you  obtain  your  x, you  have  to  multiply  on  both  sides. You  have  z  here  in  the  numerator for  each  of  the  n  terms  here. When  you  divide  by  z,  then that  will  be  a  one  lift. This  will  be  a  two  lift. Then  you  can  match  this  term  exactly. If  directly,  consider the  partial  fraction  expansion  for  x. Then  maybe  you  have  those  terms  here. In  that  case,  you don't  have  z  in  the  numerator. When  you  divide  in both  numerator  and  denominator, you  will  have  z  inverse, lift  in  the  numerator  here. In  this  case,  you  have  to  be careful  when  you  use  the  table. You  have  to  consider the  z  inverse  in  the  numerator. In  that  case,  you  need  to  use the  shift  value  sing. You  have  to  be  careful.  Later  on, we  have  a  example  to  consider  x  directly. This  is  the  case when  this  divided  by  z  has  any  simple  pole. If  we  have  a  multiple  pole, for  example,  a  s  under  water  pole  like  this, then  you  have  to do  some  manipulation  to  get  the  answer. For  example,  in  the  expansion, you  may  have  this  term,  you  have  square  here. To  do  this,  you  have  to  split this  into  two  terms  also. Basically,  you  can  do  some  manipulation  like this  because  you  have  z  minus  p  in  the  demor. My  be  here  you  purposely  minus  p, so  that  when  you  do  the  splitting, this  term  can  cancel  this. If  you  minor  p  here, That  means  you  have  minus  b  zero  times P.  You  have  two  plus  this  zero  p.  Now, you  have  this  term  plus  a  constant  term. We  call  this  constant  term  as  c  one. This  C  two  is  a  coefficient  of  this. This  divide  by  that,  you get  this  second  term. This  divide  by  this,  you  have  the  first  term. C  one  is  this.  Summation,  sum. That's  x  z  divided  by  z. Then  if  you  want,  you should  multiply  z  on  both  sides. If  you  multiply  z  on  both  side, you  have  c  one,  z  here, you  have  c2z  here. For  the  second  term,  dv  z  in both  numerator  and  denominator  to  match. This  one  here. For  the  first  term,  you  have  z  here, or  the  denominator  as  z  square. You  divide  by  z  square, in  both  numerator  and  denominator. You  get  this  answer.  This  is one  minus  P  z  inverse  squared. Because  just  now  you  have one  z  in  the  numerator, you  have  one  z  inverse. Can  we  find  this  term  in  the  table? Yeah.  The  second  term  is  just  this  term. The  first  term  has a  square  here,  so  that's  this. We  have  to  use  this  z  inverse, given  by  one  inverse  squared. The  crespond  inverse,  one  form  is  this. Therefore,  you  get  this  answer. For  your  x  k.  That's  C  one  and  this  term, based  on  this  result, it  is  k.  K  is the  time  independent  variable  times  A, in  this  case,  R  is  p,  as  you  can  see  here. P  k  minus  one. That's  the  first  term,  second  term  simple  is C  two  times  p  k. This  is  the  case  if  you  have multiple  in  your  x  d  by. Okay.  This  is  the  case. You  have  real  pose. If  you  have  a  complex  pose, how  do  we  find  the  the  inverse  this  tsp. It's  very  likely  the  denominator has  a  complex  pose. Actually  for  complex  pose, you  can  also  do partial  friction  as  you  did  here. Yeah.  In  this  case, your  P  one,  P  two  can  be  complex. As  long  as  the  semble  pot, you  can  also  do  this  partial  expansion and  get  this  answer. But  if  this  P  one  is  complex, you  get  a  compass  number  to  have  k. That's  not  your  final  answer. Because  your  x  k  should be  a  real  function  of  k. You  have  to  do  further  simplification. If  you  have  a  compass  value for  your  P  one  and  P  two. Yeah,  normally,  when  you have  a  real  denominator, If  we  have  a  complex  pole, then  conjugate  is  was  pole. For  example,  P  one  is  a  complex  number, P  two  should  be  is  congregate. In  this  case,  you  have  to  combine  the two  together  to  simplify  that, to  have  real  function. That's  complicated. You  can  do  this  or  this  is  complicated. Can  we  simplify  the  calculation? Yeah,  the  answer  is  yes. Let's  consider  this  example. First  before  we  consider the  complex  situation. Okay.  Now  let's  consider  this  example  here. For  the  denominator,  we  have  two  real  posts. That's  easy  to  do  inverse  de  tsform, and  the  sampling  period  is  showing  here, so  you  have  to  find  your  x  ct  in this  case  by  using the  pose  flection  expansion. Now,  that's  your  z  given. You  consider  x  divided  by  z. Divided  by  z,  then  you have  z  here,  so  it's  cancel  out. Then  you  have  this  term divided  by  two  factors. When  you  do  the  partial  friction  expansion, you  have  two  terms. One  is  corresponding  to  z  minus  one. The  other  is  corresponding to  the  C  con  factor, z  minus  e  e. Then  you  have  to  compute  these  two  values. How  do  you  compute  the  two  values? Yeah,  you  have  to  recall  the  message. Actually  it's  not  difficult. For  example,  if  you  want to  compute  this  value, you  just  multiply  z  man  one  to  cancel  this, then  you  choose  your  z  to  be one,  is  one,  that's  one. For  the  c  and  the  coefficient  here, then  you  multiply  this. This  factor  is  removed. Yeah,  Z  has  been  removed  here  already. You  have  this  by  z  minors  one, your  z  should  be  e  net  eight. If  you  do  a  calculation  as  net  one. That's  how  you  compute  these  two  values. You,  is  qu  to  this. After  you  multiply  z  on  both  side, you  have  z  divid  by  z  miners one  for  the  first  term, you  have  z  divid  by  this  for  the  second  term. Then  this  div  by in  numerator  and  denomerator, you  get  this  answer.  This  one,  also. Now,  you  look  at  the  table. I  think  in  this  case, you  have  these  two  bs  in  the  table. One  is  this,  the  other  is  this. This  crisponing  to  the  unit  function. This  correspond  to,  this  expial  function. We  have  this  answer. Also,  don't  forget  the  range  of  your  k. You  K  start  from  zero  up  to  infinite. In  fact,  in  the  end  of  the  table  here, You  have  this  k  stated. When  you  find  the  z  transform, you  have  to  spacify  your  range  or  your  k. This  is  part  of  the  inverse  z  transform. If  you  don't  have  this  k  specified, your  k  can  be  negative. For  example,  if  k  is negative,  then  that's  non  zero. That's  right.  You  have  to show  this  in  your  final  answer. That's  our  example  with  two  reel  pose. Just  now  I  mentioned, if  you  have  a  complex  conjugate  pole, you  can  also  do  partial  friction  expansion, like  what  we  did. But  the  computation  will  be  complicated. Because  in  this  case, you  have  a  complex  number  P one  and  complex  number  p  two. That's  not  the  fundal  result. If  we  have  a  complex  pose, this  transfer  function,  or  this  z  transform. How  do  we  fund  the  universe  transform? Look  at  this  Z. The  denmeor  is  third  order. You  have  one  we  pole  at  one. How  about  this  second  vector? You  have  two  complex  conjugated  poles. You  can  find  out. Then  I  said  you  can do  this  that's  very  complicated. What  do  we  do?  We  just  leave  this  vector. Why  do  we  leave  this  because  our  purpose  of partial  fraction  expansion  method is  to  use  the  z  transform  table. You  can  see  from  the  Z  transform  table. Such  Z  transform  will  give  you  complex  pots. Later  on,  we  will  use this  result  to  fund  the  inverse  transform. For  example,  for  this, you  can  sin  orca. For  this  z  transform, you  get  the  cosin  of  Mak  for  this  two, you  have  this  time  domain  functions. We  don't  need  to  do  further  factorization  for this  atic  polynomial  with  complex  duos. Now,  let's  consider  x  y  z. If  you  consider  x  z  d  by  z, you  will  have  three  factors. One  is  the  z  factor, second  is  z  minus  one, one  is  z  square  minus  z  plus  one. Okay. So  for  this  two  factor, you  can  easily  find  these  two  coefficients. Yeah,  Maybe  I  want  to  do  some  writing  here. For  the  first  factor,  you  should have  maybe  A  divided  by  z. Second  factor  is  maybe B  divided  by  z  minus  one. C  factor  is  a  dic  factor, so  z  square  z  p  one. You  should  have  first  order  in the  B  this  second  order. This  is  c  z  plus  d. You  should  know  how  to  find  A  B  C and  D.  T  f  A, I  two  f  A  just  multiply  z, that  z  is  cancel  out. Case,  you  make  your  z  zero, two  divide  b,  net  one  here, posted  one  here,  is  a  netive  two. That's  how  you  get  A. To  get  B,  you  cancel this  or  you  have  z here,  because  you  have  z  here. Your  z  should  be  one. Then  you  do  a  calculation one  minus  one  plus  one, or  this  is  one  plus  one  plus  two  is  four. Four  divide  one  is  four. Then  two  f  c  and  d, how  define  C  and  D.  You can  equate  the  coefficient.  Yeah. In  this  case,  you should  add  all  this  together. Then  you  have  a  enumerator. Yeah  because  you  have  this  A  and  B, so  you  do  addition, then  you  get  a  rational  function with  denominator  to  be  z  times  this, and  the  numerator  is  this  polynomial, then  that  should  be  equal to  the  numerator  here. You  equate  the  coefficient of  the  same  power  terms. You  can  find  the  C  and  D. Anyway,  you  can  try this  at  home  as  a  practice. You  C  is  found  to  be  net  two, d  is  found  to  be  net  one. That's  the  partial  flex  expansion for  z  divi  by  z. Now,  we  won't  find  x  z. Your  x  z  will  be to  z  times  each  of  this  term. For  the  first  term, z  time  that,  you  get  nex  to  two. For  the  second  term,  After  you  multiply  z, you  have  four  z  by  z  minus  one. Divide  by  z,  Impose  numer, de  nominator,  you  get four  divide  by  one  minus  z  inverse. Here,  you  also  have  z, z  time  this,  you have  negative  two  z  square  minus  z. Then  you  divide  by  z  square, Impose  numer,  de  nominator. Dnmtor  will  be  changed  to  this. Numerator,  you  put  negative one  negative  s  out, so  you  have  two  plus actually  you  have  two  z  square  plus  z, giv  by  z  square  e  this. Okay.  That's  the  sur  term. This  one,  you  can  find  from  the  table. That's  this. Function,  and  for the  second  term,  that's  this. How  about  the  term? As  just  mentioned,  for  the  sir  term, you  have  to  use the  result  here.  These  two  results. You  can  see  for  these  two  terms, for  the  two  z  transform, they  have  the  same  denominator. You  compare  this  denominator with  the  denominator  here. You  can  see  for  the  of  z  inverse, it  is  negative  two  omega  t, and  O  here  is  netive  one. That  means  you  compare this  denominator  with  that, that  means,  your  two  cosine  omega  t should  be  one  here. Which  means  cosine  omega  t  is  0.5. This  cos  omega  t  is  0.5. You  have  to  determine  cos  omega  t  first. Once  you  determine  this  cosone  omega  t, now  you  consider  the  numerator. T  match,  this  numerator, you  must  have  cosine  omega  t  here. Here  in  the  numerator  is  two  plus  z  inverse. Here  is  one.  I  Omega  t  is  0.5, this  will  be  0.5  z  inverse. You  have  to  do  some  manipulation. And  the  numerator. This  is  what  we  do. First,  we  factorize  two  out. If  you  factorize  two  out, you  have  one  here,  not  the  match  here. Then  we  want  to  have  negative zero  point  z  inverse. You  minor  0.5  z  inverse. If  you  do  subjection,  you  have  to  plus  this. For  this  term,  when  you  factorize  02  out, you  have  0.5  z  inverse  lift. This  is  the  manipulation  you  need  two. This  will  give  you  this  two  terms because  this  one  minor  z  inverse  match  here, so  you  keep  that  here. And  this  0.5  plus  0.5, you  one,  one  times  two,  you  get  two. Now,  this  term  can  be determined  using  This  is  verse  transform. Now  for  the  x  water. How  do  we  find  the  inverse  D  transform? Now,  you  have  to  look  at  the  term  here. For  this  term,  you  can  see  the  numerator is  z  inverse  sine  Omega  t. Here  is  two  z  inverse. So  you  have  z  inverse  here. You  have  to  change  this  two to  match  sin  org  t. What  is  our  sine  Omega  t? Omega  t  is  0.5. Sine  Omega  t,  or  square  root  is  3/2,  right? We  have  to  match  this  here.  So  on  Mg. You  do  some  manipulation  for  this. Yeah,  I  put  this  slide here  for  easy  reference. This  will  be  to  that. O  here,  we  have  two. You  can  easily  do  manipulation  to  change. This  two  to  this. Yeah,  just  have  scare  2/2, then  this  four  divide  by  square  2/2  s, two  divided  by  s  2/2, so  you  have  four  over  square  two. Now,  each  of  these  four  terms can  be  formed  from  the  z  transform  table. Now  you  have  to  determine when  you  find  the  inverse  transform, Omega  Yeah,  K  is  the  independent  variable. You  have  you  have  to  fund Omega  times  t.  Omega. In  this  case,  I  t  is  no  given. What  is  our  Omega  Omega  t? Yeah  I  this  is  0.5,  what  is  Omega  t? Pi  over  three,  right? So  we  have  the  final  answer  here. This  term,  we'll  give  you  link  to  20k. This  term  will  give  you  four, and  this  term  you  have  two  here, two  cosine,  based  on  this. Omega  t  is  the  Pi  over  three. We  have  Pi  over  three  here, k  is  the  integer  in  zero. For  the  four  term, you  have  this  constant  in  front, so  it's  four  over  screw  three. Then  sin,  pase  on  this, sin  Omega  t  times  k, and  the  r  Omega  t  is  this. Is  sine  Pi  over three  k  or  sine  k  Pi  over  three. Remember,  you  should  put this  condition  on  your  K, which  is  bigger  of  zero. That's  the  final  answer. If  you  encounter  a  diatic  factor in  the  denominator  with  complex  drips. You  can  leave  it. You  don't  have  to  do  further  factorization. If  you  wish,  you  can  still  do  it, you  have  to  do  more  calculation  to  convert your  complex  answer  to real  answers  as  a  shooting  here. Maybe  you  can  try  the  example with  this  mesa  and  in  the  end, I  you  should  have  two  complex  numbers, which  conjugate  each  other. You  have  to  simplify  that. This  is  the  fundal  result. Just  now,  I  said,  we can  also  directly  consider the  partial  partial  fraction expansion  for  x  z. If  you  do  that,  You  get  the  two  terms. I  don't  have  to  go  through  the  detail. If  you  do  partial  fraction  in pension  for  this  function  directly, you  get  these  two  terms. You  should  know  how  to  get  this  four. You  should  know  how  to  get this  net  three  and  the  two. This  is  because  the  Dumtor  is  second  order. Now,  that's  your  x  Z, and  we  want  to  find the  x  z  the  verse  this  ts  pom  x  X. You  have  to  convert  each  of these  two  terms  to  match  the  table. For  example,  For the  first  term,  you  should  match  this. Here  is  fortified  by Z  inverse  fortified  by  z  one. You  should  divide  by  z in  both  numerator  and  denominator. If  you  do  that,  you  get  four  z  inverse, by  one  z  inverse  here. You  have  z  inverse  here, this  Z  inverse  has  been  factorized  out. Similarly  for  these  two  terms, for  these  terms,  you  have  to do  split  as  we  did  earlier. During  that  proces, you  also  have  z  inverse  involved. You  can  practice  how we  obtain  these  two  terms together  with  the  inverse  here  at  home. In  the  end,  you  have  this  result. You  see,  if  you  don't  consider x  z  given  by  z. Normally,  you  will  have  z  inverse  in your  result  for  X  Z when  you  want  to  use  the  table. Now  for  the  three  terms  inside  the  bracket, you  can  find  in  from  the  table. This  one  is  four  divide by  one  minor  z  inverse. Based  on  this  is  four  times  one k.  One  k  is  the  uniste  function. For  the  second  term, you  have  to  use  the  cosine  function. That's  that  is  this  one  here. You  can  see  you  have  three  in  round, so  it's  cosine  Pi  over  three  k. But  this  time,  You  have  to ensure  this  inverse  this  ts  form to  be  valid  for  k  big  20. In  this  case,  I  just  use  one  k here  because  one  k  is  a  unite  function. That  means  one  k  will  be one  for  k  bigger  than  zero, it  will  be  zero  for  k  less  than  zero, just  multiply  one  k.  Yeah, that's  equivalent  to  k  big  zero. Same  as  this  here. We  are  considering  the inverse  dis  transport  that. You  have  to  use this  condition  when  you when  you  find  the  inverse  ditranspm. And  this  one  is  equivalent  to  this. Similarly  for  this  term, You  have  this  answer. I  also  need  to  put  one  k  here. Actually  for  this  case,  to  avoid  mistake, it's  better  to  put  one  K. Because  when  you  consider the  z  inverse  in  front, you  have  to  use  the  shift  value  serum. Which  means,  you  have  to  change all  the  k,  two  k  minus  one. This  include  the  K  inside  the  uns  function, one  k.  So  You have  four  times  one  k  minus  one. This  k  should  be  changed  to k  minus  one  because  of  this. Also  for  this  second  term, this  k  should  change  to  k  minus  one, and  this  k  here  also  change  to k.  Similarly  for  this  k, you  have  to  change  to  k  minus  one, and  this  k  should  be  changed  K. Yeah.  That's  the  application  of shift  value  sym  due  to  this  z  inverse  here. You  have  to  be  careful  here. If  you  directly  use  this, some  students  are  make  a  mistake because  this  K  also  should  be  changed  to  K. When  you  consider  this, forget  that  directly  write  K be  ground  zero  here. That  means,  They  don't  have  this  term. They  don't  have  this  term, they  don't  have  this  term, or  put  k  bigger  zero  here. Then  it's  wrong. To  be  safe,  you  don't  write  k  bigger  zero. Instead,  you  replace  k  g  zero  with  one k.  Then  you  when  you  consider  this  z  inverse, you  just  change  all  the  k  in the  result  two  k. That's  why  sometimes  we want  to  avoid  the  mistake. We  use  the  partial  fraction  expansion for  x  z  divide  by  Z. Then  you  don't  have  this  z  inverse. If  you  really  want  to  do  that  for  x  z, then  you  have  this  involved  and when  you  find  that  the  inverse tf  inside  the  bracket, you  have  to  use  one  k, which  is  a  this  function. That's  the  unit  state  function. This  is. From  this  example,  we  have two  different  mathematical  expression. One  is  this,  the  other  is  this. But  the  de  final  answer  will  be  the  same  if you  plot  these  two  functions. Okay. Now  we  have  one  more  mesard, called  inversion  integralsar. Just  like  nop  transform  for  transform, when  you  find  inverse  transform, you  can  use  the  complex  analysis  method to  get  the  inverse  Z  transform. For  Z  transform,  you  also  have  such  result, which  is  called  integral  mesod. If  you  are  given  z, and  your  inverse  Z  transform  x k  or  x  KT  can  be formed  by  using  this  integral. In  this  case,  your  C, you  see  this  C  is the  pass  of  the  integration, is  a  closed  pass,  which  is a  counter  clockwise  circle centered  at  the  region, such  that  all  the  pos  of  this  function. Inside  C. I  believe  you  still remember  how  to  fund  this  integrop. You  can  use  the  rest  method  to fund  the  integral  because all  the  poses  of  this  function, this  is  the  function  to  be  integrated. All  the  poses  to  be  inside  C.  You  consider all  the  rest  of  the  function. Then  you  add  them  together. You  have  the  inverse  this  ones  form. One  over  j  two  pi  times this  integro  or  be  equ  to  this. That's  the  salvation  of the  residues  of  the  function x  z  times  z  to  hurricane  minus  one at  every  pole  of  this  function. Yeah  because  your  C  include all  the  p  of  this  function. How  do  we  compute  the  residue? We  have  two  possible  cases. One  case  is  a  simple  pole. If  zi  is  a  simple  pole, then  you  can  compute  the  residue  Ki, by  computing  this  limit. What  do  you  do,  is still  multiply  this  function, that  is  d  function  with Z  minor  because  z  is  a  simple  pole. After  that,  you  take  a  limit  Z  t  to  z. That's  the  residue  of  this  function  at  z, when  z  is  a  simple  pole. When  you  do  this  multiplication, the  pole  at  Z  I  will  be  canceled  out. You  have  multiple  pole,  for  example, ZG  is  order  Q  multiple  pole  of this  gen.  Then  the  computation is  slightly  der. You  have  to  multiply z  minus  Q  with  the  function. Then  you  take  Q  minus  one  order  derivative. After  that,  you  take  the  limit  that  st  G. Then  you  divide  Q  minus  one  factorial. You  get  the  kg  for  the  pole  the  ZG. This  is  the  order  of  the  pole. This  is  based  on  residue  integration  lizard of  complex  functions. This  is  the  former  to  be used  and  you  should know  how  to  compute  the  residues.  Yeah. You  just  add  all  the  residues  together. You  could  answer.  In  this  result, your  small  k  here. Is  the  time  domain  independent  variable, which  is  a  integer  n  zero. Your  answer,  K  one,  two, k  should  involve  this k.  That's  why  you  have  minors  one  here. This  is  the  same  as  this  k. Let's  look  at  the  example  to illustrate  how  we  use the  version  integral  meso. This  is  Yeah, I  think  you  just  need  to  remember this  this  and  how  to  compute  this  kk. You  just  need  to  remember  this  s.  Of  course, you  should  know  the  risk is  for  this  function. X  Z  is  given,  you  have  to multiply  C  k  minus  one. Let's  look  at  the  example. Yeah. We  just  repeat  one  of  the earlier  to  compute  X  KT. In  the  earlier  example, x  z  is  given  by  this. That's  given,  you  have  to  find  x  KT. Now,  to  apply  this, your  X  Z  multiply  z  to  Ks. We  do  this  multiplication. X  z  times  z2k  minus  one,  you  get  this  answer. Remember,  this  k  is  big  line  to  zero. Yeah,  that's  the  time domain  independent  variable, which  is  non  tive  integer. This  z,  you  have  z  here, times  z  k  minus  one, you  get  z  k.  In  this  case, k  is  bigger  in  to  zero,  as  you  can  see  here. This  factor  should  stay in  the  numerator  because the  power  cannot  be  elective. Yeah,  because  k  is  bigger  than  zero. This  factor  won't  contribute  any  pole. You  have  to  consider  all  the  poss, you  see  of  this  function. Based  on  this,  we  have  two  possible  poses. One  is  at  one,  the  other  is  at  net  eight. We  have  the  two  poses  and  both  are  simple  p. Therefore,  you  can  apply this  method  to  compute  the  two  residues. F  K  one,  that  is  the  residue at  this  p  at  one. You  apply  the  method, you  have  to  multiply  z  minus one  with  this  function. If  you  do  multiplication, as  you  can  see,  this  is  cancel  out. We  have  this  divi  by  this. Z  tends  to  one,  so  that  will  be one  minus  this  and  this  z  equals  one, one  is  one  s.  This  dividy  this,  you  get  one. Now  for  K  two,  K  two  is  the  risk  of this  function  at  this  pole. To  compute  this,  you apply  this  missile  again. This  Z  i  is  u  net  eight.  That's  this. You  apply  the  miss,  you have  to  multiply  this  vector, mi  net,  as  you  can  see  here. Then  this  multiply  with  that. This  cancel  out,  then you  have  this  numerator  by  this  numerator. Now  you  take  a  limit,  Z  tens  that. This  z  should  be  changed  to  nel  eight. You  get  net  Akt  from  this. This  z  should  be changed  to  ter  net  eight  also. You  have  a  uteral  nel  eight  minus  one. Then  this  divide  by  that,  you  get  net  one. You  have  netive  net. Therefore,  you  add  this  two  together. You  get  the  inverse  transform. K  one  plus  k  two, you  get  this  answer. Remember,  your  K  should  be  nonnative. That's  the  result  for the  inverse  transform  of  this. Maybe  as  a  size, if  you  don't  have  this  z,  here. How  do  you  come  the  inverse  transform? Again,  If  you  don't  have  this  z, then  when  you  do  this  multiplication, this  will  be  z  to  Kelso. You  have  to  make  some  discussions because  our  K  is  bigger and  zero,  so  k  can  be  zero. If  K  is  zero,  what  do  you  have  here? Yeah.  If  you  don't  have  z, zero,  you  get  z  inverse. In  this  case,  this  z  inverse should  contribute  one  pole. Because  z  inverse  can  be  put  as  one  over  Z. You  have  three  poles  in  this  case. You  can  try  out  at.  As  a  cise. If  you  don't  have  this  z, how  do  you  find  the  inverse  transform? You  get  the  answer  will  be  different. Maybe  we  have  short  break. Maybe  20  minutes  break. Then  we  come  back  for the  topic  and  z  transform  method for  solving  different  equation. Yeah,  we  have  a  short  break  for  20  minutes. You  come  back  at  8:15. If  you  don't  have  dinner, then  you  can  have  something  to  eat. I  have  one.  I  check  the  size  is  250. Yeah.  And  the  current  size  is  131, but  I'm  still  in  the  waiting this  one  should  be  banged  by  the  school. You  have  to  email  the  MS  office. The  school  so  as  not  to  handle  registration. Thank  you. H. H. Mm. H. Okay. Let's  continue. Now  we  are  going  to  apply z  transform  method to  solve  difference  equations. This  is  a  general  form of  a  different  equation. In  this  equation, K  is  given  is  aquivn  function. And  you  have  to  find  k  from  the  equation. X  k  is  unknown  function  to  be  determined. Just  like  a  differential  equation. You  are  given  some  input  functions. You  want  to  find  the  output  functions. But  that's  differential  equation, which  means  you  have  a  derivative  involved. Here,  you  can  see the  difference  equation represented  in  discrete  domain. You  see  k,  you  have  x  k  minus  one,  K  minus. You  have  K  minus  one,  UK  Manders. This  are  given,  you  are  looking  for  x. Of  course,  maybe  you  have initial  values  given  for  x  or  so. How  do  we  solve  this  equation, T  found  x  k? The  idea  is  to  take a  z  transform  on  both  sides. So  that  this  difference  equation  can  be converted  to  algebra  equation. Then  you  solve  the  algebra  equation in  terms  of  x. If  an  x,  after  you  get  x, then  you  take  inverse  z  tsc. You  can  get  x  k.  That's the  idea  summarized  here. You  have  to  take  z  one  from, then  all  this  x  x  k  minus  one, x  k  minus  one  and  can be  represented  in  terms  of  x  z. Then  you  can  solve  the  algebraic  equation to  obtain  x  z  and then  find  the  inverse  Z  transform. To  this  method,  we  consider  example. Yeah,  Of  course,  you  have  to use  some  properties  given. Here  I  have  to  point  out  in  the  exam  paper, Z  transform  will  be  provided. A  foot  table  will  be  provided. For  the  property  of  z  transforms, I  need  the  required property  work  be  provided. It's  simple  for  you  to use  the  property  table. Now  let's  look  at  the  example. Yeah,  this  is  given  difference  equation. Actually  you  don't  have  because this  is  equation  and  it  contains  x. But  the  initial  values  are  not  zero, x  zero  is  zero, x  one  is  one. Based  on  these  two  initial  values, you  can  find  your. One.  You're  given  x  zero,  x  one, you  have  to  find  X  two,  X  three, and  two  x  infinite. Basically,  you  have  to  find  x k  in  terms  of  k.  You  have  to  find a  close  form  mathematical  expression for  your  x  k.  In  the  past, some  students  just  fund  a  table  for  x  k, then  that's  not  complete. In  this  case,  you  have  to find  x  k  for  all  k  bigger. Two  bx0x1  given. You  don't  have  two  f  x  zero,  x  one. Anyway,  you  just  need  to  use the  property  here  to  convert. This  difference  equation  to  z  brock  equation. Now  you  take  z  on  both  sides. You'll  have  this  equation  of  ten. You  have  the  zs  form  of  x  k  plus two  can  be  found  from  here. You  just  use  this  property. You  get  the  z  transform  of x  k  plus  two.  You  have  three  terms. For  x  k  plus  one, you  use  this  property. You  have  three  times  this  term. There's  two  terms.  Of  course, the  z  transform  of  x  k  is  just  x  z. R  st  zero. This  different  equation  is converted  to  algebra  equation. In  terms  of  x  z.  Now,  you  substitute  x zero  and  x  one  to  the  equation. You  have  two  x  zero, both  are  zero  in  this  case. And  you  have  x  one  here. You  move  this  z  x  one, which  is  just  z times  one  to  the  right  side,  you  get  z. Then  the  left  side,  you  have  z  squared  x  z, plus  three  x  z  three  times  z  xz  plus  two  x  x. You  factorize  xc  out  and  then solve  the  equation  to obtain  x  z.  You  get  this  answer. This  is  on  the  right  side, so  z  divide  by this  z  square  plus  three  z  plus  two. You  get  x  z  by solving  this  simple  algebraic  equation. Now,  you  need  to  get  x k.  You  have  to  find  the  verse  one. I  believe  you  know  how  to find  the  inverse  Z  transform  no. You  can  use  a  partial friction  expansion  method. To  do  that,  you  have  to  do  factorization. You  can  see  this  denominator can  be  factorized as  z  plus  one  and  the  z  plus  two. Then  you  consider  the partial  fracking  expansion for  x  z  divided  by  z. You  have  two  terms. After  some  manipulation, you  get  the  two  terms. Then  you  can  find  these  two  terms from  the  z  transform  table. Yeah.  Actually. Both  terms  are  corresponding  to  this. For  the  first  term,  what  is  our  A? This  standard  form  here  is one  minus  A  z  inverse. Here  is  one  plus  z  inverse. You  can  write  this  one Miners  Nive  one  z  inverse. Your  A  for  first  term  is  netive  one. Similarly,  for  the  second  term, your  A  will  be  nec  two. You  this  results. That  inverse  this  one  form  will  be one  to  per  k  as  shot  in  here.  A  is  net  one. For  the  second  term,  A  is  a  netive  two. They  don't  forget  this  range of  k.  You  have  to write  this  k  equals  zero,  one,  two, or  kg  equal  zero, or  you  multiply  one k.  Actually  you  have  three  weeks  to represent  the  range  of  k. This  is  one  way,  another  way,  k  bigger  zero, the  cer  way  multiply  one  k, which  is  the  unit  state  function. This  is  an  example showing  us  how  to  fund  your  X  K. Actually  based  on  the  results, you  can  see  your  X  k  or  diverge. You  this  magnitude  is  bigger  than  one. I  were  soaking  and  diverged  to  infinity. Now  for  this  chapter, we  have  the  following  conclusions. We  started  the  basic  serie  of  z  transform. Why  do  we  study  z  transform because  it's  a  powerful  tool  for us  to  analyze  and design  discrete  time  consul  system. In  the  same  way  as  we  use  non  pla  transform for  linear  time  environment, continuous  time  system? If  you  studied  classical  consul, you  know  how  to  use  non  planform to  study linear  time  environment continuous  time  system. Just  now,  we  have  used the  z  transform  to  solve  difference  equation. Basically,  you  can  convert the  difference  equation  to algebraic  equation  by  taking  Z  transform. From  the  solution,  as  you  can  see  here, you  can  see  the  evolution  of  X  k, which  includes  the  trans  period and  the  speeds  response. That  means  K  covers the  whole  range  from  zero  to  infinite. Okay.  That's  the  chapter. Now  as  I  just  mentioned, our  z  transform  will  be used  to  study our  discrete  time  control  system. In  the  next  chapter, we  will  consider  how  to  use the  to  our  discrete  control  system. Yeah. Because  when  we  study  our  consul  system, we  have  two  purpose  or  two  tasks. First,  you  have  to  do  analysis, then  you  do  design. To  do  analysis  and  design, you  must  have  a  model  for  the  system. Then  you  can  carry  out  your  analysis. In  the  first  part, I  mentioned  for  discrete  time  control  system. You  have  such  a  simplified  broke  diagram. Yeah,  this  is  a  simplified  broke  diagram. You  can  see  from  the  diagram, you  have  a  plant  to  be  controlled. And  you  have  a  conter our  contro  is  discrete  time. You  have  discrete  time  sygnus, like  K,  K.  These  are  digital  sygnes. For  the  plant,  normally  is  continuous. No  matter,  you're  using continuous  time  contro or  discrete  time  contro. The  plant  to  be  cont  is  the  same. For  example,  Yeah. Sometimes  use  continuous  consuler  to  conse the  DC  mole  but sometimes  use  digital  consoner  to  conte  it. This  is  the  system  construed. For  this,  normally, the  input  is  continuous  time. Output  is  discrete  time. For  this  overall  discrete  time  system, you  have  both  discrete  time  signal and  the  continuous  time  signal. The  study  of  such  system  is  more  complicated. To  do  this  study,  we  have  to  do  modeling. Okay? In  this  chapter,  Yeah, I  already  mentioned  that  Z  transform, which  is  important  for us  to  do  analysis  and  design. Later  on,  we  can  show  that transform  is  related  to S  plane  through  this  matching. With  this  z  transform, you  can  have  a  similar  method  to continuous  time  design  and  under  cs. This  chapter,  we  will  study the  following  two  topics. First,  we  will  both  the  saponers, and  also  holding  device. Yeah,  we  don't  have  these  two  blocks in  continuous  time  system. We  will  do  modeling  of  this  two. That's  the  first  topic  to  be  considered. Yeah,  we  should  finish  this  today. After  that,  we  have  pose  transfer  function. Just  nine  continuous  time system  was  such  a  plant, and  we  have  anaplasns  per  function, which  is  the  no  nplasns  fororm  of the  output  over the  plasans  form  of  the  input. In  our  discrete  time  consu  system, we  will  have  pan  but  it  is more  complicated  than no  Po  transfer  function. Because  in  certain  case, we  don't  have  p  transfer  function. Yeah,  we  will  elaborate  this  next  week. Now,  let's  consider  the  first  block. The  modeling  of  this  and  then  later  on, we  will  model  this.  Block. We  have  impulse  sampling and  data  hold  to  reconsider. Yeah.  Now  for  the  ADC  model. Yeah,  that  is  this  block. How  do  we  find  a  model  for  this  system? Yeah.  This  is  a  model. This  is  a  real  sampleer, which  convert  continuous  time  signal to  a  discrete  time  signal. But  if  you  consider the  real  sampleer  modeling, we  will  idealize  it. We  will  model  such  real  Samper bio  ideal  sampner, which  is  called  impulse  Sampner. Of  course,  as  I  said, this  is  just  modeling. In  fact,  when  we  do  modeling, one  purpose  is  to  model  the  system and  we  want  to  use  it  for  analysis  design. Sometimes  you  have  to  idealize  that for  easy  analysis  and  design. In  this  case,  we  have  this  ideal  model. Which  is  code  pulse  samper  here. Okay.  That's  the  model  for  the  real  samper. Yeah  this  your  input, of  course,  is  a  continuous  time  signal  x  t. How  about  the  output? The  output  is  a  train of  impulses  being  with  zero  time. As  you  can  see  from  the  diagram. That's  the  input,  x  t. Then  this,  as  I  said, this  model  will  give  you this  train  of  impulses. That's  why  it's  called  impulse  sampler. As  I  just  mentioned, this  impulse  samper  does  not  exist. Practice,  but  it's  easy for  us  to  use  it  for  analysis  and  design. We  will  see  that  later. This  ideal  sampler  will  give  you  this  output, which  is  deloted  as  x  star t.  It  is  a  chain  of  impulses, and  the  sampling  period  is  t.  That is  the  interval  between  two  success  impulses, t.  Here  is  t  that's  two  t, three  t,  and  one. The  strength  of  each  impulse  here  is the  same  as  the  sample the  value  of  the  continuous  time  signal, as  the  corresponding  sample  instant. For  example,  this  the  sample the  value  here  is  x  zero. Then  at  the  t  here,  Then  this  value  here  is the  sample  value  is  x t.  The  strength  of  this  is  x  t. The  strength  here  is x2t  and  the  s  one.  That's  the  meaning. So  we  have  this  three  properties for  the  output  of  the  sampler. Yeah  I  should  make  a  remark  about  this. This  is  a  real  sampler. Of  course,  the  real  the  output  of the  real  sampler  is  not impulse  pulses,  but  no  impulses. Something  like  this.  Your  XT  is  like  this. For  example,  you  have this  t.  Then  the  output. Yeah,  you  have  maybe  here,  one  impulse, sample  this,  so  you  get the  one  impulse,  like  this. Then  another  one  here at  the  sample  time  instant  t, you  get  another  impulse,  this. You  get  pulses,  no  impulse. You  can  see  Yeah. You  get  period  pulses. It's  a  sequence  of  x  T,  as  shown  here. For  each  pulse,  there  is a  wiz  that  is  this  is  the  wiz. Here  was  a  wiz.  And  this is  sampling  period  one  t  here. This  whiz  is  very  small. Compare  to  the  sampen  period. What  is  no  zero. In  the  ideal  case  here, the  z  is  zero. That's  why  it  is  impulse. This  is  our  model  of  the  real  samponer, will  be  this  impulse  samponer. In  our  course,  we  will  just  use  this to  represent  the  real  samponer. Why  do  we  have  a  real  sample? Why  do  we  have  this  model  impulse  sample? Yeah,  I  believe  you  still  remember some  properties  of  the  unit  impulse  function. This  is  the  definition  of unit  impulse  function. W  is  zero,  that's  zero. W  is  zero  is  infinite. The,  the  value  of  this  is  infinity. However,  the  te  group  of  this  one. For  zero,  that  is  for  obviously  postive  epsN. You  have  this  result. Why  is  the  unit  impulse because  the  integral  here  is  one. That's  why  it's  called  unity  impulse. Now  if  you  have  strans  here, the  integral,  for  example, for  this  one,  for  this  impulse, the  integral  will  be  zero, the  integral  of  that  will  be  t, and  of  course,  two. With  this  property,  You have  the  nop  transform  fm. Remember,  what's  the  np  transform  of this  function  is  one. If  you  consider  this  real  samper, it's  difficult  to  find the  np  transform  or  you  have  ideal  sampner, For  the  nopal  tans  form of  each  of  the  impulses, you  can  obtain  name  easily. Later  on,  we  will  consider nopal  transform  of  x  start, and  this  is  called  start as  the  output,  ideal  output. Now  this  is  just  the  it  impulse  function. If  you  have  a  chain  of  it  impulses, you  can  write  them  as  a  salvation of  impulse,  unitary  impulses. Yeah,  like  this.  This  is a  string  of  unitary  impulse. That  means  the  magnitude or  the  strings  is  one, which  means  the  integral  here  is  one. The  integral  here  is  one. Integral  here  is  one.  That's  also  one. Okay? You  have  a  strain  of  unit  impulses, and  you  add  all  this  together, you  have  the  Age  brac  expression for  this  strain  of  unit  impulses. Now,  how  about  this  r  t. Based  the  mod  and also  the  mentioned  Opt  e  me  here. We  can  write  X  star  t  as  this. Just  like  this.  Is  x  zero, because  the  strength  of  this  one  is  x  zero. You  have  x  zero  times  the  unity in  pulse  at  t  equal  zero. Then  here,  this  is  x  t.  The  second  term, that  is  this  impulse  can  be  written  as  x t  times  the  unit  impulse  at  the  t  miners. It's  a  delayed  impulse. Then  for  the  other  impulses, you  have  this  representation. Mathematically,  you  can  write  x  t  in  this  f. Okay.  That's  the  output of  the  unit  output  of  this  impulse  sampler. Now,  we  can  consider the  nopnsform  of  this  r  t, and  this  is  called  a  start  pansfm. This  is  a  important  concept  or  important  tool to  be  used  in  our  discrete  time  system. This  is  x  t.  If  you  take  a  Nplnsform,  of  x  t, you  have  this  notation,  x, A  will  be  equ  to the  nonplns  form  of  this  site. Then  you  apply  the  property  of  plansfm. It  will  be  equ  to  x  zero  time nonplusans  form  of  delta  t  plus x  t  times  nps  of  Delta  t  minus  cult  as  this, then  plus  other  terms. You  can  see  the  np  tsform, this  is  one,  as  you  just  mentioned. That's  why  we  use the  impulse  sampler  here  because it's  easy  for  us  to  do some  calculation  here  and  also  our  analysis. What  is  the  nonpluss  form  of  this? You  use  the  property  of  Lp  transform. This  is  delayed  by  t  t  second. You  can  use  the  delay  property, e  b  e  netive  t  times the  noble  transform  of  t.  And the  noblus  transform  of  t  is  one  times  one. Next  term,  it  will  be  delayed  by  two, t,  so  we  have  this  times  one. Of  course,  the  strength  is  x2t. We  can  see  you  can  easily  obtain  this  x. And  this  can  be  compact  rewritten  in  this  pm. X,  the  general  term  is  x  t  time  net  t, and  the  summation  is  from k  in  zero  to  infinity. We  have  obtained  this  x  star. Remember,  this  x  star  is  different  from  x, so  you  have  to  make  the  difference. This  is  the  number  transform  of  this  signal. This  x  is  number  of  x  t.  They  are  different. Now  we  can  establish a  important  relationship  between x  star  and  the  x  z. A  simple  relationship.  Yeah,  Of  course, x  and  x  z  relationship. But  the  relationship  is  not  so  obvious. Why  we  have  a  simple  relationship  here? You  can  do  some  variable  change. If  you  define  e  to  t  to  be  z. You  have  this  definition. This  is  our  stay  proc obtained  just  now  by  calculation. Now,  if  you  e  t, that  is  this  ts  You  can  move  this  k  out. This  3.2  can  be  changed to  your  x  star,  can  be  changed  to  this. If  you  replace  S  t  by  z. You  see? Anyway,  this  term,  you  can  write  this as  t  is  2p2k. If  this  is  z,  you  change  this  two  z, then  this  expiration  or  change  two  d. What  is  this?  This  is  the  z  transform  of our  x  t.  That  means, the  z  transform  of  this  is x  z  is  the  same  as  the  z  transform  of  dx. Because  when  you  use  the  z  transform, you  just  use  the  sample  value  here. We  have  this  is  sample  relationship. In  other  words,  you  can  change your  x  star  to  x  z with  this  simple  substitution. You  have  a  relationship  here. You  just  to  change  your  e  t  is  or ES  to  z.  Reversely, if  you  change  z  to  S  t, then  you  get  this  x  star  S. You  can  see  that.  That's  obvious. Of  course,  you  have  relationship between  this  x  and  x  z. Actually,  this  x  z  is  also the  z  transform  of  this  x  t  and  also  the  same as  z  transform  of this  x  star  t. Also  have  the  same  z  transform. But  when  you  consider  the  nop  transform, you  have  this  simple  relationship between  x  and  x. But  this  one  is  not  so  obvious. Then  how  do  we  get  the  relationship between  x  and  z? If  you  are  giving  x  is, how  do  you  get  x  z? You  can  use  the  z  transform  table  like  this. For  example,  if  your  x  is  one  over, then  that's  your  x  z. You  can  see  you  don't have  such  simple  relationship. There's  a  relationship, but  it's  not  so  clear. For  this  x  and  x  z, you  just  do  this  change. And  the  mathematical  expression will  be  the  same. Let's  look  at  the  example to  show  such  insight. I  Now,  we  consider  a  pulse sampler  this  figure  with a  sampling  period  t.  If  your  input, signal  x  t  is  net  t. No,  this  x  t  is  a  signal  like  this, e  ne  t  for  t  g  zero, so  that's  like  this. In  this  case,  your  x  star  will  be  pulse  like this,  is  exponentially  decaying. Something  like  this.  That's  your  stay. If  your  x  t  is  this. Now,  this  x  size  requires  you  to  determine  x, which  is  the  nopal  ts  bomber  of  x  t.  Also, you  have  to  find  x  star, that  is  x  star  mathematically. Then  you  find  x  and  x  z. We  can  get  the  s  inside  about how  we  obtain  x  from x  s  or  how  we  get  x  s  from  x  x. Now  let's  look  at  the  solution. For  this,  clearly the  nop  transform  is  this  straightforward. You  can  also  use  the  table as  you  can  show  here. For  this  explain  function, you  have  this  no  transform. No,  x  is  t  of  impulses. Which  can  be  written  in  this  form mathematically.  That's  x  zero. That's  the  sample  the  value  at zero  times  z  t  plus  x  t, Sample  the  value  at  time  t, first  sample  instant. This  is  the  first  one,  you  sample  x  zero, x  t,  then  time  this impulse  and  one.  That's  your  x  t. We  just  have  this  obtained  earlier. Mathematically,  here. This  is  the  general  form. Based  on  this  general  form, you  have  your  t.  For  this  example. That's  the  general  form.  Now,  x zero  is  one  because when  t  is  zero,  that's  one. Then  when  t  is  cat, you  get  this  for  the  sc  and  sample, the  value  is  two  t, change  this  t  two  times  t  one.  That's  your. That's  the  answer,  which  is also  showing  graphically  like  this. Here.  That's  the  t  t. Now.  For  the  noble  transform of  this,  yes,  easy. You  take  a  numbers  transform of  this  right  side. Now  the  will  give  you  one.  This  is tive  t.  This  nobles  transform  is  u netive  S  t.  You  have a  negative  two  t,  which  is  constant. Then  this  noble  transform is  netive  two  s  t  and  the  c  one. You  add  this  two  gather,  you  get  this  answer. Initial  Initial  term  is  one, and  the  common  ratio is  netive  t  time  net  s  t. That's  x. X  z.  Using  the  definition  of  z  transform. You  have  the  z  transform  for this  time  t.  We  consider the  transform  is  also applicable  to  continuous  time  signal. But  based  on  the  definition, you  just  use  the  sample  values to  fund  the  z  transform. That's  x  zero  plus  x  t  is  the  inverse, plus  x  two  is  the  inverse  and  so  one. If  you  do  a  calculation,  x  zero  is  one, x  t  is  this,  x  two  is  this, then  you  get  this  answer. Clearly,  between this  two  expression,  they  have  the  same  form. You  just  do  simple  substitution, t,  t,  change  to  z. You  get  the  you  get  your  x  z. You  can  you  have the  same  mathematical  expression. This  one  is  one  over  S  plus  one. You  don't  have  such  simple  relationship. This  one,  you  just  do  substitution, you  get  the  same  mathematical Function. Later  on,  when  we want  to  find  the  pulse  transfer  function, we  will  obtain  x  star s.  Then  from  the  x  star  S,  you  can  get  x  z. Or  if  you  get  x  z,  you  can  find  x  star. You  have  the  same  mathematical  expression with  such  simple  substitution. This  is  an  important  relationship. This  one  so  be  remembered. Of  course,  if  you  want  to  find  x  z  from  xs, you  can  also  do  that,  but you  have  to  use  the  table  here. Like  this,  you  get  this  transform. This  two  different  signal will  give  you  two  different  nop  tans. But  this  nopal  transform can  give  you  x  z  easily. Next,  we  will  have another  block  to  be  considered. That  is  this  block. Yeah.  For  this,  the  model  is just  a  impulse  saper. Now  for  this,  how  do  we  model  this  block? That's  the  next  topic. D  model.  Actually,  the  function of  this  block  is  to  hold  the  data. Is  called  data  holding  device, or  sometimes  called  a  digital  to analog  conversion  and the  zero  order  in  the  digram. Basically,  this  block  or generate  continuous  time  signals. Your  input  is  a  discrete  time.  Okay. So  it  will  generate  continuous  type  signal, HT  from  a  discrete  time  sequence,  x  KT. Yeah,  something  like  this. Basically,  this  is  a  time  domain. You  have  zero,  T, two  t  and  so  one. Maybe  here  is. This  is  the  time  domain. Then  you  have  signals  x  zero, maybe  x  t,  x2t, and  the  x  T.  From  those  data, you  have  to  generate output,  which  is  continuous. In  this  case,  We  want to  fund  a  continuous  time  function  here, which  is  called  HT. This  is  HT. You  are  using  this  previose  data to  fund  this  function,  HT. The  output  HD  of  the  data hold  the  process  during  this  period, that  is  bigger  ne  e2t  or  d  plus  one  t  can be  ft  by  using  a  polynomial,  like  this. Yeah,  that's  your  H. We  are  looking  for  this  part. This  can  be  a  polynomial  function. Described  by  this.  KT  plus T.  T  is  between bigger  and  zero  or  less  than  cat. That  is  starting  from  here, your  toe  is  in  this  range. This  is,  that  is this  point  plus  this  in  this  period. You  are  using  those  data to  find  this  function, H  KT  plus  tub. This  can  be  written  as a  polynomial  of  t  like  this. This  is  order  polynomial. You  can  see  in  this  polynomial, you  have  a  zero, a  one  up  to  A  n  to  be  determined. You  have  n  plus one  coefficients  to  determine. To  obtain  this  n  plus  one,  values. You  have  to  use  n  plus  one  data  points. Yeah.  That  is  you  form  n  plus  one  equation. You  can  solve  the  equation  to  obtain  a zero  up  to  a  n.  That's  the  general  case. We  have  to  use  x  K,  that  is  x, x  k  minus  one, two  x  k  minus  t. You  have  to  use  those  data to  fund  this  polynomial. Of  course,  you  have  some  constraints. For  example,  H  KT  should be  K.  That  is  at  this  point. You  polynomial  function  value should  be  the  same  as  your  KT. The  sample  value. That's  the  requirement  for  your  date  of  18. In  this  way,  your  A  zero  can  be determined  because  your  A  zero, you  can  see  this  polynomial  is  this. Here. I  to  zero. That  at  this  point, you  have  KT  to  be  a  zero. And  this  A  zero  is just  X  KT  because  based  on  this  constraint. Your  polynomial  can  be  written  in  this  form. You  change  zero  to  X. You  have  to  determine the  remaining  an  efficient. This  is  s  For  simple  CT, in  our  course,  we  will  use  zero  or  hood, zero  H.  Yeah,  that  is  your  N  is  zero. In  this  case,  your  function  here, just  to  x  T.  That  means, You  zero,  you  just  need one  point  to  determine  your  H. This  H  is  a  hot  as  a  constant. Yeah,  that  is  horizontal  ne  here. It's  not  a  curve  now. This  is  x. On  cat,  that's  at  this  value. This  is  zero  or  hot, which  is  a  very  simple  case. Therefore,  we  have  this  zero  hood. H  K  t  plus  tile  is  x  k, tile  bigger  zero  s  and  t  for all  non  netive  k.  Graphically, it  is  something  like  this. Showing  here.  Constant  value. If  you  have  a  number of  discrete  time  input  like  x  zero  here, x  one,  x  one, x,  x2t,  x3t,  and  one. This  after  t  zero, This  will  be  hold  as constant  as  x  zero,  this  is  x  zero. Then  at  this  value, this  is  t,  x  t, this  is  hold  as  x  t.  Here, this  is  two,  this  value will  be  x  two  and  c  one. That's  the  graphic  representation. In  other  words,  zero  or hold  holds  the  value  of x  T  at  this  time  instant. Until  the  next  sample  arrives.  You  see  here? F  t  from  zero  to  t  is  hold  at  this  value. Then  at  the  t, you  have  sample  the  value  arrive. This  value  is  jumped  to  here  to  x  t, and  then  this  is  a  hold until  the  next  sample  arrives. Next  sample  is  x2t. This  actually,  this  one  is  circle. No  that  means  at  this  t, the  function  value  is. And  this  two,  the  function  value is  actually  two  t. That's  the Result  of  zero  order  hoot. Zero  hoot,  you  have  this  input, you  have  this  output  in  time  domain. Unless  otherwise  mentioned,  in  our  course, we  will  use  zero  order  hoot. Now,  let's  look  at  the  model  for  this. Yeah,  this  is  just  a  mathematical. No. This  is  just  a  graphic representation  of  the  output, and  that's  the  input. Then  how  do  we  represent  this  zero  hoot? Using  a  model. Now,  we  have  to  find  a  model  for  this. Basically,  we  will  find a  transfer  function  to  represent  zero  order. Now  look  at  the  model. We  have  two  diagrams. This  diagram  is  for  the  real  system. We  have  a  real  sampler. The  input  is  x  t,  continuous  time  signal. You  sample  this,  you  get  x  KT. Then  through  zero  hold, you  get  output  h1t. We  have  to  find  this  bottle. For  this  figure,  we  are  going to  use  a  model  to  represent  this. Real  sampner  is  represented by  this  impulse  sampner. You  have  the  same  input, but  this  output  is  x  star t.  And  the  corresponding  nopans  m  is. For  this  one,  it's  difficult  to  find  the  nps. That's  why  we  have  this  ideal  model. For  this  zero  order  hood, Assume  is  transfer  function, is  GH  is  zero. T  fund  the  model  for  this  is equivalent  to  fund  this  transfer  function. If  we  fund  this  transfer  function, you  get  the  model. Now  let's  look  at  how we  fund  this  transfer  function. Of  course,  this  real  output, h1t  should  be  the  same as  the  model  output,  h2t. We  have  same  X,  same  output. Now,  based  on  this,  we  are  going to  find  GH  zero. That's  the  question  to be  solved  or  the  problem  to  be  solved. Now,  let's  look  at  the  first  tigram. Yeah. Look  at  this  first  diagram, we  funded  the  h1t. You  have  this  H  one, represented  in  this  form. Do  you  know  how  we  get  this? Yeah.  We  look  at  the  diagram here.  This  is  the  output. How  this  part  of  H,  in  this  case. You  see,  B  gn  equal  to  zero, but  th  t,  your  H  t  is  just  x  zero. Based  on  this  diagram. This  can  be  written  x  zero  times  a  window. This  window  can  be  one, this  is  one,  and  this  is  02t. After  this,  t,  the  outgroup  should  be  zero. How  do  we  replace  in  this  window? Yeah,  this  window  can  be  written as  you  see  over  this  period  of  time, is  just  one  t.  Then  after  this,  is  zero. For  this  two  be  zero,  it  just  minus  one t  minus  t.  You  see, for  this  case,  for  this  term, wind  is  in  this  range. That's  zero  that's  one.  But  the  wind  is, big  equ,  that's  zero. This,  this  HT  for  this  part, can  be  written  as  1t1t  minors  City, multiply  with  zero. That's  the  representation  of  this  part. We  have  this  first  term. For  the  second  term,  you  do  the  same. X  cat  times  a  window. But  this  time,  the  window  is  like  this. Is  one  here  and  zero  in  other  range. To  replace  this  window, it  will  be  one  t  minus  capit minus  one  t  minus two  capacity  because  one  t  is  in  this  range, that  is  between  Bigger  line  equal  to  t, than  two  t.  This  is  one,  or  this  is  zero. Outside  this  range,  so  equal  so  is  zero. Similarly,  for  this  next,  a  output. Your  H  one  in  this  case, or  be  represent  in  this  form. This  is  a  mathematical  representation of  this  output,  this  graph. This  can  be  compact  written in  this  form.  This  is  the  general  form. X  k  times  this  window,  which  is  one, one  p  k  less  than  k  plus  one k.  This  is  output, H  one,  for  this  for  this  case. Yeah,  for  the  first  figure. So  we  have  the  h1t. Now,  we  take  an  plus  ones  form  of  this. Because  we  are  going  to  find  one. Actually,  our  purpose  is  to  find  one  S. You  take  a  nop  transform  this  and  the  note, the  nonplus  transform  of  this  one  is  one over  S  times  the  delay  the  effect, which  is  multiplying  with  e  elect  t because  this  is  delayed  by  second. You  have  to  multiply  e  elect  t. Is  one  over  time  that. That's  from  the  transform  property. We  have  this  answer for  the  nop  transform,  one. This  is  a  constant  and this  nop  transform  or  two  t  k  d  is  by. For  this  one,  the  np  transform is  t  k  plus  one  ts  over. We  have  this  result  and now  you  can  do  some  factorization  here. Basically,  For  this  term, you  have  net  K  t  is. This  can  be  written  as  Native  K  t is  and  they  then  times  e  netive  t  is. You  can  factorize  E  two  net  K  is  to  get this  and  then  you  have  one  e  tive  t  is  over. But  this  is  a  constant  constant  means independent  of  k,  because  here, you  have  onetive  t  is  over S.  This  can  be  moved  out  from  the  smation. This  can  be  changed  to  that. Your  H  one.  That's  your  H  one is  obtained  to  be  this.  Here. Now  for  this  second  diagram  in  Part  B, your  H  two  is  or b  this  transfer  function  times  x. Based  on  this  diagram. What  is  our  x?  We  found  this  earlier. If  you  still  remember, we  have  determined  earlier. What  is  that? Here.  That's  x  star  is. We  just  use  this  result  here. Is  g  is  zero  time  this  x  star  is. Your  H  two  is  should  be  the  same  as  one  is. What  is  our  H  one  is? We  have  found  this  H  one  is. That's  one.  You  compare  this  two. This  part  is  same  as  this  part. What  is  GH  is  zero? GH  is  zero  or  this,  right? We  have  this  mod  for  the  zero  or  hood. This  is  an  important  mod, which  will  be  used  throughout  our  course. In  the  future,  if you  have  this  zero  order  hold, you  can  directly  use  this  transfer  function. T  represent  zero. That's  the  mo.  This  is a  summary  for  this  section. Yeah.  We  have  consider  the  samper. Samper,  we  have  a  real  sampner. But  this  real  samponer  is  like  this. Yeah. You  have  pulses  generated, and  the  pulse  each  pulse has  the  i  is  no  zero. However,  this  p  the  whistle  of the  pulses  is  smaller compared  to  the  sampling  period as  showing  this  diagram. This  for  real  samper. T. Se  narrow  pulse,  narrow  pulses, can  be  idealized  as  impulses. Therefore,  this  real  sampner  can  be bolded  by  impulse  sampers. That's  the  model  for  this. We  have  this  part  and  the  zero  order  hoot. We  have  drift  transfer  function, which  is  one  minor  net  to  ts  over. In  the  future,  we  have notations  to  differentiate  real  sampleer and  the  impulse  sampleer. For  real  sampleer, as  you  can  see,  we  don't  have  the  row. But  for  the  model  impulse  samper, we  have  this  here. The  output  of  the  real  sampleer  is  just  x k.  But  the  output  of  impulse  sampner  is. That's  the  difference  in  notation. Okay. This  is  the  model  for  zero  or  hot. As  I  said,  this  will  be used  throughout  our  course. You  have  to  remember  this  transfer  function. In  the  nodes,  we  also  have the  derivation  of  the  model for  first  order  hold, which  is  given  by  this  here. It's  more  complicated.  This  is  optional. You  don't  have  to  remember  this because  we  don't  use  this  in  our  course. If  you  are  interested  in  this first  hot,  you  can  read  this  part. To  fund  this  transfer  function. It  is  a  derived  in  the  notes. You  see?  So  I  just  leave  this  to  you  as a  reading  baterias  no  exam for  this  part  for  you  to  read. We  will  stop  here  today  and  the  next  week, we  will  consider  pulse  transfer  functions. Now  that  will  be  related  to the  to  the  plate and  the  other  rocks  in  the  diagram. Okay.  So  we  stool  here  today. We  will  have  its  on  the  fourth  week. Yeah.  Yeah.  Week  four  week  four  and  today the  Week  two. Okay.  Yeah.  I  will  give you  detail  later.  Okay. And  the  Qs  how  many  questions or  content  of  the  c. I  think  contents  is just  up  to  two  weeks  later. Yes.  So  we  have  finished  two  weeks. So  it  will  cover topics  next  week  the  week  one. Yeah.  I  will  give  you  the  details  later. Thank  you. A  H.  Is  a  lot. Sorry. Yeah.  I  for you  to  read for  your  own  reading Hey.  Kind  of  liz  up.
