Okay, let's start. I should give you this announcement. Next Monday, we have quiz. Here is the details. We will have the quiz 8:30 to 9 pm. That means I finish my lecture first. Now we have a short break. Then we have the quiz. Of course, the quiz will be in this LT and the duration of the quiz is 30 minutes, as you can see from here. This is a closed book quiz. For non-MCQ type questions, you should show the working clearly on the paper provided. The scope for the quiz will be the topics from Chapter one to Chapter three of my notes. The first three chapters. The weightage for this quiz is just 10%. That's why it's just half hour.

For the grouping and the seat arrangement, I will provide you the detail later because so far, I don't have the details of registration for this course. I don't know how many students and I don't have the list of the student name. When you come, you have to sit according to the group assigned to you. I will give you more details about the groups. You have to sit according to the group assigned to you. We have a few blocks here. I will show you how the group sitting is arranged. Because we will take attendance group by group. We have to sit in the group assigned to you.

As I just mentioned, the quiz is a closed book quiz. You can bring your calculator, but you cannot bring unauthorized material. I will provide necessary transform pairs required in the quiz. That means if some pairs are not required, I don't provide them. You cannot use mobile phone during the quiz. Actually, not just mobile phone. Maybe you also received this notice here. I should show you this notice. I just received this afternoon. You cannot use phone, you cannot use smart glasses. You cannot use smart watches. And you shouldn't have any communication during the quiz. As I said, you can use your calculator, but you cannot use other unauthorized materials. Cheating or attempting to cheat will result in disciplinary action. I received this slide this afternoon. I just make this slide here to show you. This is about the discipline for closed book quiz, the rules for closed book quiz.

As just mentioned, attendance will be taken during the quiz. If you have valid reasons for absence, you have to show me the proof. If you don't have such proof, zero mark will be given. Valid reason include medical certificate, but you have to show me the MC. If you have a valid reason, you have to send me an e-mail by 5:00 P.M. the next day. That is the next Tuesday. Then I will arrange and make a quiz for you. This is an announcement. I believe you also received this announcement e-mail. That's the announcement for the quiz.

Now let's continue with our lecture. Last week, we considered modeling of the ADC and also DAC with zero order hold. Now we are going to continue about modeling of some of the blocks in the system. Here, one important topic is pulse transfer function. Today, we will start with pulse transfer function.

As you studied in continuous time system, you have a transfer function for a block like this, for example, this block. You can see for this block, the input is continuous, the output is continuous. If you want to model this plant, you can use a Laplace transfer function. For example, you can label this as G_p(s), p stands for the plant. Then this can be written as the ratio of the Laplace transform of the output to the Laplace transform of the input. This is the model for the plant. We study this in continuous time system. Now for discrete time system, we have the same concept, but it's more complicated. In fact, if we just consider this plant with a continuous input u and the continuous output y, there's no pulse transfer function. You have a continuous time transfer function. But you don't have pulse transfer function. We will make it clear later.

Then in what case, we have pulse transfer function? Let's consider this system. This system will have pulse transfer function. In this case, our input, as you can see from this diagram, our input is continuous time signal x(t). This is the system we are considering. We have input x(t), output y(t). But for this system, it consists of a sampler, which is modeled by impulse sampler, and the continuous time plant. In this case, we will show the system has a pulse transfer function, which will be the z transform of the output divided by the z transform of the input. We are going to derive this.

How do we derive this? We will use the convolution summation approach. Now let's consider this system. First, we assume our input x(t) is zero for negative t. That means there is no input to the system. As just mentioned, we have an impulse sampler here. This x(t) is sampled by this impulse sampler, then you have this impulse signal, x*(t). This x*(t) is actually the input to the continuous time system, as you can see here. This x(t) is not directly applied to G(s). Instead, x*(t) is applied to G(s) here. That's the input, for the output, we have signal y(t). That's the output. Assume this system is causal. In this case, your output will be zero for negative t, because if you have a zero initial condition, if you have no input, then you don't have output. That's the meaning of causality. Because x(t) is zero for negative t, output will be zero for negative t also. If the initial condition of the system is zero initial. When we talk about transfer function, it's always for zero initial condition.

Now, we are going to find the output y(t) under the input x*(t). How do we compute this y(t) if the input is x*(t)? You can use this convolution integral to compute the output. For convolution integral, we have two formula here, they are equivalent. This is g(t minus tau) x*(tau) integrate with respect to tau from zero to infinity. This is the same. You just interchange the order of these two signals. You can have x*(t minus tau) times g(tau). This is the convolution between g and x*. This is the convolution between x* and the g. They are commutative, so you can swap the order here. This is the computation of the output if we have input x* given. Then our purpose is to find the z transform of the output. We are going to find this z transform. If you get y(t), then you can find y(z). That's one purpose of the convolution summation approach. Once we get the y(z), later on, we want to find the ratio between y(z) and x(z). If you have such a ratio, then you have a pulse transfer function.

Remember, our purpose is to find y(t), from y(t), we find y(z). Actually, this g(t) is also called the impulse response of the system. What does this mean? This means, if you take inverse Laplace transform of G(s), then you get g(t). That's called impulse response of the transfer function G(s).

Now let's compute our output y(t). We are going to compute this. Here, I will use the second formula to do the calculation. To use the second formula, I have to do the calculation. Therefore, I need some manipulation here to get the x*(t minus tau). We are going to use this formula as you just mentioned. To get the x*(t minus tau). We have to use this form for your x*(t). This is a train of impulses as mentioned last time. Graphically is something like this. Remember, we are going to use this. Graphically, x*(t) will be a train of impulses like this, starting from zero here. At t zero, you have this impulse. At t is T, the first sample instant, you have this impulse and so on. That's your x*(t), a train of impulses.

However, in our formula, we are going to integrate with respect to tau, and we are going to find x*(t minus tau). To do this, we have to find the x*(tau) first. That means if this is tau, x*(tau), then x*(tau) will be like this. That's our x*(tau). It's a train of impulses. Now, in order to get x*(t minus tau), we find x*(negative tau) first. This is how we get the x*(negative tau). This just do a reflection. The x*(negative tau) will be like this. This is still the impulse at time tau equal zero. But this one is reflected here, this one reflected here. That means this is negative T, this is negative 2T, and so on. This is our x*(negative tau). For this, delta(tau) is ideal impulse. It is a unit impulse defined like this. If tau is not zero, then delta(tau) is zero. When tau is zero that's infinity. Then this x(0) is the strength of this impulse. That's the sampling value. This is the impulse here.

Now, we are going to compute the y(t). To compute y(t), as I just mentioned, you have to get x*(t minus tau). We are going to consider the following cases. If t is bigger than or equal to zero, but less than T. Then you just move those impulses to the right by t second, to get x*(t minus tau). Now with this t in this range, you will get this impulses. When t is bigger than zero, but strictly less than T, this impulse will move to here, and this position is between zero and capital T. But this one, you also move to the right by t second. But this t is strictly less than T, then this still remain on the left side. Of course, this would still remain on the left side. In other words, this impulse will move to the right side like this, if t is bigger than or equal to zero, but less than T.

Now, if you use the formula here, remember, we are going to use this formula to compute our y(t). Then you just have one impulse on the right side. That is this impulse on the right side. Our integral, you can see that our integral is from zero to infinity. That is your tau is bigger than zero. Only one impulse is effective. Here, if you do integral of x*(t minus tau) times g(tau) for tau from zero to infinity. You just have one term because of this impulse on the right side. That means the integral, which will give you y(t) will be equal to this impulse, that's x(0) delta(t minus tau) times g(tau) d tau. This is the application of our formula here. Only one impulse, that's this, on the right side, which means for tau from zero to infinity, I have one impulse. Now you do integral of this. When you do this integral, is done with respect to tau. Therefore, you can move this x(0) out. x(0) is constant. Then you have delta(t minus tau), and you can change this tau to t. Because if tau is different from t, this will be zero. Only when tau is the same as t, the delta will be non zero. You can change this tau to t. Once you change this tau to t, you can move this g(t) out because this is not a function of tau anymore. You have x(0) g(t), and then times the integral of delta(t minus tau) for tau from zero to infinity. That's one. So you have this answer. We have this result. When t is bigger than or equal to zero and less than T, your output y(t) will be g(t) times x(0). That's this answer here.

This is the case when t is bigger than or equal to zero and less than T. Now let's consider this range of t. With this range, t is bigger than or equal to capital T, but strictly less than 2T. Then in this case, you move all the impulses to the right side by t second. But this t is in this range. Therefore, these two pulses move to the right side. That means this pulse will be between T and 2T. This impulse will be moved between zero and T. You have two impulses on the right side. Then you apply the same formula to compute y(t), you will have two terms as you can see here. This case, you have two impulses, then you get two terms in the integral. One term is due to this impulse, and the other term is due to this impulse, as the second term. To find this integral, you just have x(0) g(t), because t is the same as tau, that's non zero. When you find this integral, of course, this x(T) is moved out, you get this. When you find this integral, it will be g(t minus T) because only when tau is equal to t minus T, that's non zero. You have this answer. In this case, you have two terms like this.

You continue in this way. When t is bigger than or equal to 2T, but less than 3T, you have three terms. Because if you move this pulses to the right side by T second with the t in this range, you will have three impulses on the right side. Then you have this three terms. You continue. For arbitrary k, I mean, arbitrary non negative integer k, when t is in this range, you will have k terms like this. This is the general form for your y(t), when t is bigger than or equal to kT and less than (k plus 1)T. You can find the results based on our convolution integral here by considering how to obtain this x*(t minus tau) for different range of t.

As you can see here, we get different mathematical expression here. Can we unify all these expressions in one form? The answer is yes. Actually, you can unify them. How do we do the unification? Actually, all these can be written in this form. You know why? Because our g(t) will be zero for negative t. Remember, we have no output when we have negative t. We should have this conclusion. For negative t, our g(t) is zero. That means here you can plus zero, which can be written as g(t minus T). Because t is less than capital T. That's negative. That's zero. Just plus zero times x(T). This term is zero because t is in this range. You can also plus g(t minus 2T) x(2T). Because this is also zero, as this is negative. When t is less than T, of course, it will be less than 2T. You just continue plus all the zero terms behind. g(t minus kT) x(kT). All this term will be zero if your t is in this range. Because that's negative, this is also negative, when k is bigger than or equal to one. This expression is the same as this. Same for second expression. When t is less than 2T, then you can also plus some zero terms behind this g(t minus 2T) x(2T). This is zero because t is less than 2T. You just continue to plus g(t minus kT) x(kT). This can also be written in this form. So this expression for all t in this range, you can unify them into one expression. This expression can be written compactly in this form. You have g(t minus hT) x(hT) for h from 0 to k. This is the case when h is zero, that's equal to k, that is h equals k, that's the first term, second term, because it is g(t minus T). This is when h equals one, that's this. This is true for all t bigger than or equal to kT and less than (k plus 1)T. We have this output y(t).

Once we have this output y(t), what's the next step? As I just mentioned, our purpose is to compute our y(z). Because we are going to find the transfer function. We are going to find this y(z). How do we find the y(z)? You just use the definition of z transform. Based on the definition, you have to sample this y(t) to get y(kT). You sample this y(t) at the sampling instant kT. You get this answer. This y(t), you just change this t to kT. This t, change to kT, you have this answer. That is the y(kT). Once we have this y(kT), we can compute our z transform.

Actually, you can see this is also the convolution summation of discrete time systems. If we consider the convolution for discrete time version, it is in this form. This y(kT) can be written as x(kT), convolved with g. Actually, we can generalize this k to infinity. How do we do that? To infinity, you still use this fact. g(t) is zero for t less than zero. That means you can also here, that form, y(t) is obtained from here. You can actually add more terms behind. That is g(t minus (k plus 1)T). This is zero because t is less than this. This g, you can also multiply with x((k plus 1)T). This is zero term because t is less than that. Then you can continue until this go to infinity. Therefore, this k can be further extended to infinity. By using this property, g(t minus hT) is zero for h bigger than k. That is h equals k plus one plus k plus two and so on until infinity. This k can be extended to infinity. You have this answer. That's our y(kT).

Once we have this y(kT), we can use the z transform definition to find our y(z). In summary, this is y(kT). y(z) will be y(kT) times z to the negative k for k from zero to infinity. That's the definition of z transform. I substitute this y(kT) to here. You have this answer. This part is y(z). Now, let's do some calculation. We just do a variable change. Here, we have variable k. We do a variable change, we define a new variable m, which is k minus h. Why do we have this definition, because we have kT minus hT here. We define k minus h as m, then this will be g(mT). Of course, this is still g(t), basically, we just change variable k to variable m. From this, our k, k would be equal to m plus h. This k change to m plus h. How about this? Our k is from zero to infinity as you can see here. If your k is zero, actually, maybe I need to do some presentation here. In fact, if you do this, we have an intermediate term for this. This m will be negative h. I just write this here. That will be from negative h. That is when k zero, that is m negative h. When k is infinity, m is still infinity. In fact, this should be changed to that. This summation should be changed to this. However, this summation can be split into two parts. That is from negative h to negative one, plus m from zero to infinity. For this first term, m is negative. When m is negative, g will be zero. Actually, this term is zero. Therefore, this two term will reduce to this. For m negative, which is this part, you get a zero answer. This will give you zero. We don't have to write this. This is a variable change to change this two sums into these two summations.

Now, we can rewrite these two summations into the product of these two terms. Because h from zero to infinity, you have this x(z) to power of negative h, that's this. This one is g(mT), you have z to the negative m. That's combined into this. What is this answer? This answer is our x(z). That's the z transform of the input. How about this part? This part is the z transform of the impulse response. When you find the z transform of this g(t), you have to change t to kT. That means you have to do sampling. You have this g(mT) here. This is your z transform of impulse response g. And this is the z transform of the input. Therefore, your y(z) can be written as G(z) times x(z).

Now, you can see from this calculation, our G(z) can be written as the ratio between the output z transform and the input z transform. This is the pulse transfer function for this system. Remember, this system has two parts, a sampler together with transfer function, G(s). This is a continuous time system. This is the result we obtain, normally, this is a rational function of z, and this is called the pulse transfer function for this system. Once you have achieved this G(z), you can simplify this system into this form. The input is the z transform of the input signal x(t), then these two parts can be represented as pulse transfer function G(z). Then output has a z transform y(z). You can see y(z) equals G(z) x(z). This is how we derive the pulse transfer function for this system, convolution summation approach. The idea is to find the y(t) first by using the convolution summation, and then from y(t) you can get a y(z). And you can write y(z) as G(z) x(z) finally.

This is important result. You can also see, if you just use convolution method to do the derivation of pulse transfer function, is quite complicated. You can see even for this simple system is very complicated. If you have more complicated systems such as feedback system, maybe we cannot use convolution summation. Then how do we find the pulse transfer function for a more complicated system? That's the next approach, called starred Laplace transform. We still consider the same system. As you can see here, for this system, the input is continuous time, you have sampler to get x*(t) as a discrete time signal applied to the continuous system with a transfer function G(s). Then you have continuous output. You can see in this system, you have a continuous time signal, x(t) and the y(t), and you have also starred signals, which is x*(t). This system has a mix of continuous time signal and the discrete time signals. If you use this convolution approach, we will obtain the formula just established. That is this formula here.

Now, based on this formula, we are going to derive, to find pulse transfer function, called starred Laplace transform. Now, based on this diagram, you can find your output Laplace, which will be G(s) times x*(s). This is the Laplace transform of x*(t). Now, we are going to find the starred Laplace transform of y(t). In other words, if we take starred Laplace transform on both sides of this formula. Then the left side is Y*(s). Just like x*, give you starred transform of x, you have this x*(s). Then the right side, you also take a starred transform. You get this answer. Now, the question is how do we simplify this? We are going to obtain simplified version for this. How do we get the formula for this? I think we have to use earlier result. That is the relationship between starred Laplace transform and the z transform. I think last week, we mentioned that this can be changed to x(z). If you just change e to the Ts to z. You don't have to change the mathematical expression. You just have to replace e to the Ts with z. You get x(z). You have one to one relationship. Or you can change z to e to the Ts, you can obtain x*(s) from x(z). They have one to one relationship by this simple substitution.

Based on this result, we are going to have the following. If you change e to the Ts to z, or if you change z to e to the Ts, y(z) can be changed to Y*(s), and your x(z) can be changed to x*(s). Your G(z) can be changed to G*(s). Just replace your z by e to the Ts here. Just now, we have this. We have this answer derived. Therefore, from this, you have this result. That means you can change your y(z) to Y*(s) with this substitution. You can change your G(z) to G*(s). And you also can change x(z) to x*(s). This is derived from this formula. On the other hand, our Y*(s), this is Y*(s), equal to this. Therefore, you compare this expression with this expression. You can get this answer. That is, you can put the star inside to get G*(s) times x*(s). This operation, you can consider this as a star operation. It will give you this result based on the substitution here. This is an important formula because we can get our pulse transfer function easily by using this formula. Later on, we will practice how to use such a formula to find our pulse transfer function. Because you can also change G*(s) to G(z), like this. You can also change x*(s) to x(z). After you have this simplification, you can obtain the corresponding z transform from here.

Now let's look at an example. Suppose the sampling period is T, and this G(s) is a first order transfer function. If the input x(t) is unit step. We are going to verify the formula here. That is, we verify Y*(s) is G*(s) times x*(s). How do we do the verification? Remember, from the diagram here, Laplace transform of the output is G(s) times x*(s). Therefore, the left side is the same as Y*(s). If you can find Y*(s), then you get this. How do we get the Y*(s)? You can get the Y*(s) from y(z) because of this relationship here, based on the result just derived. Just now we have this formula here derived for the system, y(z) is equal to G(z) times x(z). G(z) can be found from the z transform table, it will be that. Because this G(z) is the z transform of the impulse response of G. You just use the table. You can find G(z). If you look at the table, you have such a term in the table. That's your given G with a as one. G(z) will be obtained from the table as here with a being one. That's x(z), that is the z transform of x(t). Based on this, that's the z transform of unit step function. That's the y(z).

This is y(z), but we're going to find Y*(s). How do we get Y*(s)? You use the substitution here, you change z to e to the Ts. You have two z here, one z here, one here, you change to e to the Ts. z inverse will be changed to e to the negative Ts. This would be changed to e to the negative Ts. That's your Y*(s), which is the left side. Now, we are going to verify this answer equals G*(s) times x*(s). Now let's look at the G*(s). What is G*(s), G*(s) will be the starred Laplace transform of g(t). The g(t) is this. Remember, your G(s) is given. You have to find the g(t). As mentioned earlier here, g(t) is the inverse Laplace transform of G(s). That's e to the minus t. g*(t) is a train of impulses. g(0) delta(t) plus g(T) delta(t minus T), and so on. Then you substitute this g(t) with the sample values. g(0) would be one. First sampling at T is e to the negative T, and this is e to the negative 2T, then you take a Laplace transform of g*(t), you get G*(s). This Laplace transform is one. This Laplace transform is e to the negative Ts times this. In the end, you have this answer.

For x*(s), you get x*(t) first. x*(t) is delta(t) plus, and our x(0), x(T), x(2T), so on. You have this because this is a unit step input. If you sample the unit step, you get one as the sample values. Then take a Laplace transform, you get this answer, delta(t) will give you one, that will give this. In the end, you have this. Therefore, if you multiply this two, you get this answer. Clearly, we have this conclusion that G(s) x*(s), the Laplace transform here, equals G*(s) times x*(s). That means you can factorize x*(s) out when you take Laplace transform of this product.

One question is, if you don't have transform here, if we just have G(s) times x(s), and you want to take a starred Laplace transform, what's the answer? Actually, this one, you cannot have this factorization. You can obtain a starred Laplace transform, but you cannot have this factorization. We will show this later.

Now, we consider these two diagrams. This diagram is the one from here. But this one has a difference from that. What's the difference? We don't have sampler here in the front. This one, you have a sampler. In other words, the input to this G(s) is directly continuous time signal, x(t). That is x(t) is directly applied to this. Now for this first diagram, we have this answer already. Now, you can find y(z) equals G(z) times x(z). Because this starred Laplace transform of this can be written as G*(s) times x*(s), and then you can change starred Laplace transform to z transform. You get y(z), change Y*(s) to z transform, you get y(z). G*(s) to G(z), x*(s) to x(z). Therefore, you have this factored form. Therefore, we have the pulse transfer function derived earlier for the first diagram.

How about figure B? In figure B, we don't have sampler in front of the G(s), as you can see from the diagram. This is figure B. So we don't have the sampler in the input side. In this case, you have this Laplace transform, y(s) equals G(s) times x(s). That's very simple from continuous time system theory. If you want to take a starred Laplace transform on both side, this left side, get Y*(s). Right side, is the starred transform. But we cannot do anything to simplify this. We just write this G(s) times x(s) as [Gx]*(s). That means this cannot be separated. Actually, this is just a notation. Maybe I put this notation with a delta above. We just denote this as [Gx], this Gx means the product between G and x. That's just a notation here. So you cannot do separation. But you can still get the z transform. This Y*(s), if you want to get z transform, you get y(z), which is the z transform corresponding to y(s). You can find this from the z transform table. This z transform is corresponding to the z transform of this product. You can multiply this two and then you get the Laplace transform. Then from the table, you can find the corresponding z transform. Again, we denote this as the z transform corresponding to this product, which is also denoted as [Gx](z). That is G and x cannot be separated, and this is different from G(z) times x(z). In general, one of them is constant. This is not separable. Therefore, in this case, you cannot find the ratio between y(z) and x(z) because this [Gx] is not separable. There is no pulse transfer function for this second system. No pulse transfer function for this system, but the first one you have pulse transfer function.

In summary, if your input is a discrete time signal to the system, you have pulse transfer function. If your input is a continuous time signal, no pulse transfer function. We have this important discussion. For figure B, we don't have pulse transfer function because of the absence of the input sampler. This sampler just give you discrete time signal here. In some case, in the practical system may be like this here. The input is discrete time, but we don't have sampler here. As long as this is discrete time, then you have pulse transfer function. Because the input is discrete. If we just consider this system, I mean the plant, the input is continuous, output is continuous, then you don't have pulse transfer function. As just mentioned, that's the case in figure B. So the absence of input sampler will not give you discrete time input to the continuous time system. Therefore, the presence or absence of the input sampler is crucial in this case. But for the output side, doesn't matter. Because the z transform of this y(t) will be the same as the z transform of this y*(t). This is important, but here is not important. You have to have an input signal to the system. The input should be discrete time, in order to have pulse transfer function.

Let's look at the example. Now, just mentioned, we have a pulse transfer function for this system. Assume this G(s) is given to be one over (s plus a). You are going to find G(z). Also for figure B, we don't have pulse transfer function. But if you are given the input, for example, is unit step input, you can still find the z transform of the output. There's still a z transform. Actually the z transform, as mentioned earlier, is just the z transform corresponding to this product. You still have y(z), but you cannot find the ratio between y(z) and x(z). But you can still find y(z). This example shows how we find y(z) for figure B.

Now for first question, when we consider figure A, our z transform, G(z) will be the pulse transfer function. That's the z transform corresponding to G(s). How do we find this z transform? You can use the table. Just now we have the table showing here. Based on this table, you just use this term here. That's the pulse transfer function for figure A. Now, for the second question in the exercise, you need to find the y(z), if the input is the unit step. How do we do that? You find the y(s) from the diagram. y(s) is G(s) times x(s). y(s), G(s) is given to be one over (s plus a), your x(s) would be one over s because your input x(t) is unit step signal. That's your y(s). Then y(z). Now, I already mentioned this y(z) is the z transform corresponding to y(s), which is the z transform corresponding to this product. You can use the table also to find its answer. That's the Laplace transform. Here in the numerator you have a, but in our Laplace transform here, that's the product of this two. You don't have a, you just divide by a in this result. That's the y(z). But there's no pulse transfer function for this. That's the concept about pulse transfer function.

Next, recall this block diagram again. Just now, based on our analysis, we don't have a pulse transfer function for this. Because the input is continuous time. But we have pulse transfer function for this two block, because this input is discrete time. Now, consider the model for these two blocks. That is the pulse transfer function of DAC together with the analog system. I already mentioned this just now. We have this plant. I assume the plant has a transfer function G(s). Sometimes we put G_p(s). Doesn't matter, just notation. So assume you are given this G(s), and you have the sampling period given. From this model for this block, you have a transfer function. Do you still remember the transfer function for this? We derived this transfer function as the [1 minus e to the minus Ts] over s. If sampling period given, the transfer function of the two blocks will be the product between this zero order hold and this G. This transfer function, doesn't matter, it is [1 minus e to the negative Ts] divided by s. And this is G(s).

Now you are going to find the pulse transfer function of this two blocks, which is the product of this two transfer functions, denoted as X(s). You are looking for the corresponding z transform, corresponding to X(s). Remember, we have pulse transfer function for this system already because we have a sampler here. Now you are looking for the z transform corresponding to X(s) with this two transfer functions multiplied. Normally, G(s) is a rational function of s because our physical system is normally causal. For causal system, G(s) is a proper rational function of s. Therefore, you can rewrite your X(s) in this form, which is to combine G(s) with one over s. You have G(s) divide by s, you just have this [1 minus e to the negative Ts] here. This is written in this form, and we define G(s) over s as G1(s). That's your X(s). You multiply G1 to each term of this bracket, you get these two terms. Now, we are going to find the z transform corresponding to these two terms. Assume the impulse response of G1(s) is g1(t). That is, you take an inverse Laplace transform of G1, you get g1(t). Then our x1(t), which is the inverse Laplace transform of this second term, can be written as g1(t minus capital T) because this is a delay factor. If we studied the property of Laplace transform. If we multiply e to the minus Ts with this G1, in time domain is equivalent to g1(t) delayed by T second. This z transform corresponding to x1 would be z inverse times G1(z). This is the shifting theorem of z transform. Therefore, with this X(s), the corresponding z transform would be the z transform of this two terms. Then you apply the linear property. This is the z transform of the first term minus the z transform of the second term, which is the z transform of x1(t). The z transform of first term is denoted as G1(z), and this z transform is z inverse times G1(z). You can factorize G1(z) out, you get this. What is our G1(z)? G1(z) is the z transform corresponding to G1, that is, this transfer function. If you know this transfer function, you can find G1(z). For example, you can find G1(z) from the table.

In conclusion, if you have this Laplace transform, which is the product of a zero order hold transfer function and a continuous time transfer function, then the corresponding pulse transfer function can be obtained as [1 minus z inverse] times the z transform corresponding to G(s) over s. That is this. You can see that this [1 minus e to the negative Ts] can be simply replaced by [1 minus z inverse]. That means this part can be simply replaced by [1 minus z inverse].

Now let's look at the example. Suppose we have a zero order hold together with a continuous time transfer function, G(s). That is this plant can be represented by this transfer function. This transfer function can be a transfer function of the servo motor. Now, you are going to find the pulse transfer function for this system. Just use the formula, G(z) will be the z transform of this transfer function, and applying the formula we just obtained, have [1 minus z inverse] multiply with this transform. [1 minus z inverse] times the z transform of this G(s) multiply with one over s. One over s times that, I get one over s square times (s plus one). You can do partial fraction expansion of this so that you have these three terms, and you can use the z transform table to get the z transform of each of the term. For this term, it will be this. For the second term is the integrator. You have this z transform. And for the third term, you can use this. You get this answer. That's the pulse transfer function of the system given here with the G to be this. Alternatively, you can see this is figure A with the G given by this. Yes, it's the same. G here is given by this, and that's actually the combination of these two blocks. This is the model of the two blocks.

As you can see from the simplified block diagram here, we have found the model for this zero order hold. Now we have found the model for this two blocks. How about this block? This block actually is the digital controller. Normally, this is designed by us. Consider a digital controller. Maybe I can show you the diagram given here. This is equivalent to this. We have this digital controller. This input is the error. Output is m(k) or m(kT) if you are given the sampling period. This normally denoted by difference equation. You have the input signal, you have the output signal. This is designed by us. You can use a difference equation to replace this controller, with this input, this output here. Then you take a z transform on both sides. You get this answer because we are considering zero initial condition when you consider transfer functions. This will give you M(z), this will give you a1 z inverse M(z) and so on, this a_n z to the negative n times M(z) because this is delayed by n samples. On the right side, you have E(z). Therefore, you factorize M(z) out on the left, factorize E(z) out on the right. Then you have this pulse transfer function. That's the pulse transfer function for digital controller. Normally, this is designed by us. As long as your input is discrete time, you have pulse transfer function. For this case, both input and output are discrete time. For this two block, the input is discrete time. But for this plant alone, the input is continuous time, you don't have pulse transfer function.

We have considered every block of this. We have a short break, maybe for 20 minutes, then you come back at 8:00. Then we continue to consider pulse transfer functions of interconnected systems.

Okay, let's continue. We have considered the model for each of this block, and for these two blocks, we have the pulse transfer function to be this formula here. Now, we consider more complicated systems. For example, if we have some cascade connections of certain blocks like this, then how do we find the pulse transfer function? We have two cases. In the diagram showing figure A, we have G and H two blocks. But between these two blocks, we have a pulse sampler. For figure B, we have the cascade connection of G(s) and H(s), but between these two blocks, we don't have an impulse sampler.

How do we find the pulse transfer function for each of these two diagrams? We don't use the convolution approach to find the pulse transfer function. Instead, we will use the starred Laplace transform to find the pulse transfer function. Assume all the samplers are synchronized and have the same period T. Then for Figure A, you can show that the pulse transfer function from input x(t) to output y(t) will be just G(z) times H(z). G(z) is the z transform corresponding to G(s). H(z) is the z transform corresponding to H(s). It's the product of this two pulse transfer functions. But for figure B, because there's no sampler here, the pulse transfer function would be the z transform corresponding to the product G and H. This product is denoted as [GH](s) and the corresponding z transform is denoted as [GH](z). In general, this is different from the G(z) and H(z).

How do we get this results? Let's look at the calculations. I put the figure here for easy reference. Now, let's consider figure A, that is this figure. Based on this figure, we should have some of the Laplace transform to be determined. For example, the Laplace transform of u(t) is given by G(s) times its input, x*(s). This is x(t), the corresponding Laplace transform will be x*(s). Also for this block, the output is y(t). The corresponding Laplace transform is y(s). It is equal to H(s) times the Laplace transform of u*(t). That is u*(s) here. We have this two equations. Here you can see that u*(s) or u(s) are intermediate variables. u(s) is the Laplace transform of u(t). u*(s) is the Laplace transform of u*(t).

Now, you take a starred Laplace transform for both equations, and you should use the formula derived earlier. If you remember, we have this formula in here. As I said, this is an important formula. G(s) x*(s), you take star, it would be G*(s) x*(s). You take a starred Laplace transform on both sides. For the first equation, this will give you u*(s). For the right side, you apply the formula here, it will be G*(s). You just directly apply this. Similarly, for the second equation, you take a starred Laplace transform, will give you Y*(s). The starred Laplace transform of this side will be H*(s) times u*(s). In other words, you can factorize this u*(s) out to get this. These two equations are in terms of starred Laplace transform. As I mentioned earlier, you can convert starred Laplace transform to z transform with this simple substitution. You can change to z. And also Y*(s) to y(z). Maybe before you do that, we do a substitution. Because as I mentioned earlier, u*(s) will be intermediate variable. You substitute this u*(s) to here. You have this equation, Y*(s) equals H*(s) G*(s) x*(s). This is the output starred Laplace transform. This is the input Laplace transform. Then you just convert all the starred Laplace transform to z transform. Y*(s) will change to y(z). H*(s) change to H(z). G*(s) change to G(z), x*(s) change to x(z). Therefore, the pulse transfer function for this system will be y(z) divide by x(z), which is G(z) times H(z). That's this result.

Now, for figure B. You also consider the Laplace transform of the output. Based on this diagram, you can see the Laplace transform, y(s). Now the y(s) would be equal to H(s) times G(s) times this input Laplace transform, which is x*(s). You have G*(s). As just mentioned, G(s) times H(s) is denoted as [GH](s). This is just a notation for this product. Now you take a starred transform on both side and use this formula again. You will have y(s) changed to Y*(s). The starred Laplace transform of this will be the starred Laplace transform of this multiply with x*(s). In other words, this [GH] here is this Laplace transform. If you take a starred Laplace transform, you get this, and then you change to z transform, Y*(s) will change to y(z). This Laplace transform will give you z transform, [GH](z). That is this one here. That's the z transform corresponding to this product. And the x*(s) change to x(z). You have this pulse transfer function, y(z) divide by x(z), which is [GH](z). That is the z transform corresponding to [GH](s). As I just mentioned, this product is different from this z transform, G(z) H(z).

Now let's look at the example. Suppose G here is a first order transfer function, given here, one over (s plus a), and H is one over (s plus b). For figure A, you have this sampler, for figure B, you don't have sampler here. Therefore, for figure A, the pulse transfer function would be G(z) times H(z). That is the z transform corresponding to G(s), multiply with the z transform corresponding to H(s). This is the Laplace transform. Then you use the table. This z transform table is very useful. You refer to this table by considering this Laplace transform, you have this z transform. For the first z transform is this, for the second z transform, you just change your a to b. You get the product. That's the pulse transfer function for this first figure, in which you have this pulse sampler.

For figure B, you have this pulse transfer function, which is the z transform corresponding to the product, and the product is just one over (s plus a) times one over (s plus b). This product can be rewritten into these two terms. You can obtain this by partial fraction expansion. Now you use the table again, this is constant, so you can move out. This z transform obtained from here. For the second term is this. You just do a subtraction, you get this answer. Clearly, this answer is different from the previous answer. We must be careful. When we ask you to find the pulse transfer function, you have to check whether or not there is a sampler between cascaded elements, like here. This one you have, this one you don't have. If you don't have, you have to consider the product of the two transfer functions. Then you find the corresponding z transform like this. That's for cascade connection, like this.

Now, we have feedback connection, such as this figure here. You want to find the pulse transfer function from the input R to output C. Clearly it's difficult to use the convolution integral method to find the pulse transfer function. However, we will use the starred Laplace transform. Basically, we need to use this formula to do the derivation. What we are going to do is to find the equations in terms of Laplace transform. Then we take a starred Laplace transform and eliminate the intermediate variables, such as e here. Then we find the relationship between the input and the output. From that, you can get the pulse transfer function. Let's do that.

Let's look at the first equation, that's e(s) here. You can write the equation directly from the given diagram. This e(s) is R(s) minus this signal. This signal is H(s) times C(s). That's the first equation. Also, this output, C(s) is G(s) times e*(s). That's from the diagram. You have the two equations. You can do a substitution, you substitute this C(s) to the first equation. Your e(s) can be rewritten as this, e(s) equals R(s) minus H(s) G(s) e*(s). This is an important equation, and this e(s) is intermediate variable. We have to change e(s) to e*(s). How do we do that? We take starred Laplace transform on both sides. On the left side is e(s) change to e*(s). On the right side, you have this difference R minus HG e*. When you take a starred Laplace transform for subtraction, you can move the star to each term. The first term will be R*. The second term, this actually is [HG e*]*. You take star. When you have subtraction or addition, you can move star inside. That's R*(s) minus [HG]*(s) e*(s). That means this star can be moved to here in the second term. For this second term, you can apply our formula here. That is, you can apply this formula. Your G is the same as HG here. This star can move to this part, then times e*. This e* is same as this star here. You have to know how to apply this formula. That's why you have this. This [HG]* is the starred Laplace transform corresponding to this product. You just apply this formula, it will be this Laplace transform times e*. That's the e*(s). Now you move this second term to the left, and factorize e*(s) out, then you can find your e*(s). This is to eliminate our intermediate variable. As I said, e*(s) and e(s) are intermediate variables. We have this e*(s).

Now, you also consider the C equation. If you take a starred Laplace transform on both sides of this equation, the left side will give C*(s), right side would be G*(s) times e*(s). Just apply this formula here. Then you do a substitution, you have C*(s) equals this. Then you can change all the starred Laplace transform to z transform because of this simple substitution. That won't change the mathematical expression. This C*(s) change to C(z). G*(s) change to G(z), R*(s) change to R(z), and this [HG]*(s), change to [HG](z). This [HG](z) is the z transform corresponding to this product. You cannot separate this. In fact, in the diagram, between this G and H, there is no sampler. They cannot be separated. That's C(z) equals this. Now, you can find the ratio, C(z) divide R(z). You have this pulse transfer function. This is how you find the pulse transfer function for this feedback system. You can see the starred Laplace transform is an important approach to find the pulse transfer function, even for this feedback system.

Now, as a practice, you can consider some diagrams here. Actually, for the first diagram, is the same as this, except you have a sampler here outside the feedback loop. But this sampler does not affect your result. That's why you have C(z) represented in this form, same as this. Here, you can see. You have a pulse transfer function, C(z) divide R(z) to be G divide (1 plus GH)(z). As I said, you can practice this diagram to get this answer. In this case, there is a sampler between G and H, so they can be separated. Here, G and H combined. Maybe you try out to find this C(z). Then from that, you get the pulse transfer function C divide R. For this diagram, you have more blocks, G1, G2, between G1 and G2, you have this sampler, and you have feedback between this G2 and H. No sampler. You can see here in the result, your G2 and H is combined. But the G1 is factorized out. In this case, you have a pulse transfer function because you can find a ratio C divide R. That's the pulse transfer function. For this diagram, you can still find the C(z). C(z) is this. However, there's no pulse transfer function for this. Because in this case, G1 and R cannot be separated. You cannot find the ratio between C and R for this diagram. Similarly, for this diagram, you have this C(z), and you cannot find the ratio between C and R. There is no pulse transfer function for this system. You can practice how to use our starred Laplace transform to find C(z). Just follow this example here. That's the pulse transfer functions for feedback system.

Now, let's look at the closed loop pulse transfer function of a digital control systems. Just consider this digital control system, which is shown here also. You can see you have two block diagrams. One is in figure A, the other is in figure B. In figure A, this block diagram is not modeled. You see here, you just have sampler, you have digital controller, you have zero order hold, you have plant. Now, for each of this block, you can have a model, in the s domain. R(t) change to R(s). e change to e(s). This sampler is modeled by this impulse sampler. e(kT) will give you e*(s) because that's the sampled output. This is a real sampler. This is the model, which is ideal sampler. You get the impulse response here. Your digital controller in s domain is just G_d*(s), m(t) change to m*(s). Zero order hold has this transfer function. And the model plant, you have a Laplace transfer function. c(t) change to c(s). This figure B is the model for figure A.

Now, we are going to find the closed loop pulse transfer function for this system. Once you get this model, now you can calculate the pulse transfer function from input to the output. Now let's do that. Now, I put this diagram here for easy reference. Just mentioned this G_d. In z domain, it will be G_d(z). You can just change the G_d to G_d(z). s transform and the z transform can be interchanged. They are implemented by using a difference equation.

Now, let's look at the diagram for this two block. For this two blocks, we derived the transfer function G(s). This G(s) is the product between the zero order hold transfer function and the G_p(s). Then from the diagram, you can compute the output Laplace transform, which is equal to G(s) times G_d*(s) times the input. This equation is obtained directly from the block diagram. You take a Laplace transform on both sides, c(s) change to C*(s). Here, this product is just a starred Laplace transform. You apply the formula then, we just mentioned, this starred Laplace transform is factorized out, then G change to G*. This equation is in terms of starred Laplace transform. You can convert all starred Laplace transform to z transform. C* change to C(z), G_d* change to G_d(z), G* change to G(z), e* change to E(z). Now we have this first equation. Actually, this E(z) or e* will be intermediate variable.

Now we have to consider another equation. That is the error equation. Based on the diagram, E(z) would be equal to R(z) minus C(z). If you want to do more calculation, we have e(s) equals R(s) minus C(s). Then you take a starred transform, you should have e*(s) equals R*(s) minus C*(s). Then you change Laplace transform to z transform, you get this. Now, you do some substitution. You just substitute this to the earlier equation here. This E(z) should be eliminated because it's an intermediate variable. This is to replace our E(z). In this equation, you just have the output C(z) and the input R(z). You just find out the ratio between C and R. You get this answer. That's the pulse transfer function for this feedback system. In this transfer function, G_d is designed by us. How do we design G_d? We will consider in the design part. It will be covered later. Basically, you should design G_d in such a way that the overall system meet the required specifications.

Now this is the general case. Next, we consider a special situation. We have a digital PID controller. As we know, if you have a continuous PID controller, you will have this equation. This is the output of the controller in continuous time domain. Your input is the error e(t). This is also in continuous time domain. You have the proportional term. This is the integral term, this is the derivative term. That's why it's called PID controller. That's analog controller. Now I already mentioned, e is the input to the controller, m(t) is the output of the controller. K is the proportional gain, and this T_I is the integral time, and the T_D is the derivative time.

Now we are going to consider the digital PID controller. We obtain the digital PID controller from this. Basically, we are going to find the z transfer function. That is the pulse transfer function. To do this, we have to find our M(z) in terms of E(z). Then you find the ratio between M(z) and the E(z). You get the pulse transfer function. Now, we are going to sample this signal. This t will be changed because you are looking for the z transform. You have to sample the signal, m(t) change to m(kT), and the right side, e(t) will be changed to e(kT). In this case, we have some approximation. For the first term, we don't have approximation. We just do sampling. For the derivative term, in this discrete time domain, you can approximate the derivative de/dt by using this ratio. That is the difference in the input, e(kT) minus e((k minus 1)T). That's the difference between two successive sample values of the error, then divide by T. This is the approximation of this derivative. If sample period is very small, then you have smaller approximation error.

For the integrator, we have this approximation. Maybe I'll show you how we do the approximation for the integrator. Look at the diagram here. Suppose our e(t) is this curve. When we do sampling, we have e(0), e(T), e(2T), e(3T), and so on. Then when you consider the integral, that is this integral, from zero to kT of e, it will be the area below the curve. That's the integral. That's the exact integration. Now, when you do sampling, we have to approximate this area below the curve by the summation of the areas of a number of trapeziums. For example, for the area below this part, it is approximated by the area of this trapezium. How do we compute this area? It will be this height plus this height divided by two, then times this. This is T. This height is e(0), this height is e(T). You have [e(0) plus e(T)] divide by two. We call this f(T) then times T here. That's the first term. This T times this is the area of this trapezium, this one. Then you have this second trapezium, that this plus this divide by two times this T. This is the term. T is factorized. You just do this until the not achieve infinity. You have this approximation of the integration, T times this summation here. Of course, in front, you have T_I, that T_I is from the integral time.

Now, we are going to write this summation compactly in this form. That is, we have [e((h minus 1)T) plus e(hT)] divide by two, for h from one to k. Now our purpose is to find the z transform of each term. This z transform of m(kT) is easy. This proportional term is also easy. m(kT) will give you M(z), this K constant will give you. How about this summation? We consider this separately. We define this as f(t), something like this here. Now let's look at how we do that. This is the summation term. We define this summation as y and this z transform. Of this summation, would be the z transform of this function f divided by [1 minus z inverse]. Why do we have this? I think this was covered in my first lecture. I hope you watched the recorded video lecture. In one of the example in the first lecture, we have this situation. You are given the z transform of this function, you want to find the z transform of this summation. You can use this formula. That is, it will be F(z) divided by [1 minus z inverse].

From this, we have our F(z) found first. This F(z) is the z transform of f(k). Remember, our f(kT) is defined to be this as shown here. This z transform is z inverse times E(z) plus E(z) divide by two. Then you factorize E(z) out, you get this, one is from this second term, then plus z inverse from the first term, then divide by two. That's the F(z). That's this z transform. Therefore, the z transform of this function, that is the z transform of this summation, will be equal to this z transform divide by [1 minus z inverse], so I repeat this. That's the z transform for this summation here.

Now, we come back to this. Just now we pay attention to this z transform. We have found this z transform. Now, based on this equation, you take z transform on both sides, the left side, m(kT) will give you M(z), and the K is constant. This K will give you. E has been factorized out. For this term, just now, we found the answer, given here. E(z) is factorized out. You have this left. For the third term, you should have T_D over T. T_D over T, and this E(z) is taken out. You have one left. This term will give you z inverse. E(z) also factorize out. That's from this equation.

Now, let's do some manipulation. We do the addition and subtraction here. For this term, we just minus one and plus one. When you do this, z inverse minus one is combined. This [z inverse minus 1] over [1 minus z inverse], you get negative one. Negative one times this, you get this term here. Then this one plus one, you get two. Two divided by this two, you cancel this two, then you have T over T_I. T over T_I left, and the denominator is [1 minus z inverse]. You have this second term. In other words, this term is split into two terms by minus one and plus one here. This [z inverse minus 1] divide this, will give you negative one. Now you simplify this. You have a constant gain, plus K_I divide by [1 minus z inverse], plus K_D times [1 minus z inverse]. You can see that, your K_P. This K_P is just K minus K times this term. Your name for K_P is proportional gain. Clearly, because you have this subtraction here, so that's less than the original proportional gain in continuous time domain. For the integral gain, K_I would be equal to K times T divided by T_I. That's this. K_D is called derivative gain. That is K times this.

We have M(z) written in this form. Then the transfer function will be M(z) divide by E(z). We have this PID pulse transfer function, which has three terms, K_P plus K_I over [1 minus z inverse] plus K_D times [1 minus z inverse]. You can see that in discrete time domain, your integrator is 1 over [1 minus z inverse]. In continuous time domain, that is in the s domain, it will be one over s. For the derivative term, in z domain is just [1 minus z inverse]. But in the s domain, it will be s. That's the PID pulse transfer function.

Now let's look at the example. Here, we have digital PID controller. We have zero order hold, we have a plant. And this G and the G_p can be found as this. G_p is given by this. That's the continuous time transfer function for the system. Your G_p is given to be this. This G_p is given as this transfer function. This can be the transfer function of a DC motor. Now, if you sample the signals with a sampling period of 1 second, then the zero order hold transfer function would be, change T to one, you have this result. Now we are going to find the pulse transfer function for this two blocks. How do we do that? You can apply our earlier formula for the zero order hold together with the G_p. We have this formula derived earlier. That is, this formula is basically [1 minus z inverse] times the z transform corresponding to G_p(s) over s here. In fact, we had an example to find this. We just use the result of the example. You get this answer. This is the pulse transfer function for this two blocks. You should know how to find this pulse transfer function. We frequently use this formula to do this.

Now, you can have this block diagram representation for these two blocks. This is the transfer function for these two blocks. This is the PID controller, K_P, K_I, K_D, you have three parameters. Now if you choose K_P to 1, K_I to 0.2, K_D to 0.2, then you have this PID pulse transfer function. You add this three term together, then you have this rational function. Now you can compute the closed loop pulse transfer function. It would be this times this divided by 1 plus this times this. That's the formula to compute the closed loop pulse transfer function. Then you just substitute this G_d and this pulse transfer function to the formula here. After simplification, you get this answer. That's the closed loop pulse transfer function.

If you want to find the output response for some test input. For example, if this is the unit step, how do you find the output? I think if you want to find the output, you have to use the computational tool for such a system. Because the computation of the output manually is very tedious. Now if you use MATLAB with input to be one over the period for k from 0 to, in this case to 40. 0 to 40, you have output. You have this input vector, every component is one for this vector. You have 41 components for k from 0 to 40. That's the input. Then you can consider this definition of numerator and denominator, based on the obtained closed loop transfer function. You have this numerator coefficients defined as a vector NUM. You have the coefficients of the denominator as the vector DEN. That's the input and the output can be found by using this filter. If you do a MATLAB operation, you get this result. That's the output for this system, if the input here is unit step. You have this output. As you can see here for this output, you have a large overshoot, maybe 70%. And you have zero steady state error, because eventually, your output will track the reference input. This is your output, if your input is unit step. Now you can also try ramp input. In this case, you define your input as k, 0 to 40. This k is changing 0 to 40, and you have the same numerator, denominator, then you have the same command with this numerator, denominator and the input. You have this response.

This is our third chapter, which is about modeling. I'll give you a summary. In this chapter, we studied the modeling and the analysis of discrete time control systems. We have the following considerations. We have modeled the sampler ADC by pulse sampler. We have modeled the zero order hold, and we also consider the pulse transfer function. That's the main task of this chapter. Our quiz next week will cover up to this chapter. I have some time to go through Chapter four. The contents of this chapter will not be covered in next week's quiz. But it will be covered in quiz three. I will give you more details about quiz three when I come back later after Prof Lee's lecture.

Now for this chapter, we will consider some analysis of discrete time control systems by conventional method. In chapter three, we already consider modeling. Now we are going to use such a model to do analysis. We will study the following topics. We will consider the mapping between s plane and z plane. We consider stability analysis of the closed loop system in z plane. We also consider transient and the steady state response analysis. For the transient response, we just show you some typical specifications, because manual analysis is difficult. For example, for this system, if you want to find a transient response, normally, you need to use MATLAB, such as the overshoot, rise time. It's difficult to find such specifications manually. I will just give you some specifications. But for steady state response, we can do analysis. Basically, you can use final value theorem to do the calculation for steady state response. The focus for this chapter is mapping between s and the z plane and the stability analysis, and the steady state response analysis.

Now let's consider the mapping between s and the z plane. We will use this relationship to consider the mapping. s is a complex variable, which can be denoted as sigma plus j omega. Sigma is the real part of s. Omega is the imaginary part. If you recall complex variable, you will have two parts, as shown here. When you consider s plane, normally, you use the rectangular form to represent your complex variable. That's why you have real part and the imaginary part. But for variable z, z is also complex variable. We will use the other complex representation. The other representation is the polar representation. For z, you have this representation with this mapping here. You just substitute s here. You get e to the T times sigma plus j omega. Just change s to this. Polar representation means you have the magnitude and phase angle. Now, what is the magnitude for this complex variable? I just multiply T to the two terms in the bracket, you will have e to the T sigma plus T j omega. Then when you consider the exponential function, this will give you e to the T sigma times e to the j omega T. What's the magnitude, the magnitude is e to the T sigma. Then how about the angle? Omega T. That's the polar representation for z variable. Normally in s plane, you use rectangular form. But in z plane, you will use the polar form. For polar form, the angle is not unique. Actually, the angle is multi valued. That means T omega, or in terms of angle, that's T omega. But if you plus two pi, you have the same angle. The angle is multi valued. That's the basic relationship between s plane and z plane.

Now let's consider some typical mappings. This relationship will be used. Now, the first mapping we will consider is the left half plane of s plane. Because for stability of a continuous system, all the poles of the closed loop system should be in the left half plane. We will consider the mapping of left half plane into z plane. How do we define the left half plane? For left half plane, your sigma should be less than zero, and then no restriction on omega. That's the restriction on sigma. The omega can be from negative infinity to positive infinity. This is a diagram here. This is the s plane, the left half is this. To consider the mapping of this left half plane to the z plane, we consider the boundary first. What is the boundary? The boundary is j omega axis. In this case, the boundary is the case sigma equals zero. Sigma equals zero corresponds to the boundary of the left half plane. Then what is the image of this boundary? That is, what is the image of j omega axis in the z plane? You just use this relationship. If your sigma is zero, this would be one, because sigma is zero, this is e to the zero, which is one. Therefore, the image of this j omega axis corresponds to this trajectory, that is the magnitude is one. Graphically, this represents the unit circle. For the unit circle, the magnitude is one. And we have no restriction on omega in this case. That's the image of the j omega axis. Now, for left half plane, your sigma is less than zero. When you consider the magnitude, using this relationship here, if this is less than zero, this magnitude will be less than one. That means it will be inside the unit circle. The image of the left half plane will be inside the unit circle in the z plane. That's the conclusion for this mapping.

Actually, you can do further classifications for the left half plane. The entire left half plane is mapped to the inside the unit circle. But if you consider some strips, you have some further division. Now let's consider primary strip and the complementary strips. To do this, we assume our sampling period is T. If T is the sampling period, what's the sampling frequency? It will be one over T. Now, if you consider the sample frequency in radians per second, that is omega_s. It will be two pi f, it will be two pi divide by T. This is the sample frequency omega_s in terms of radians per second. In fact, our omega here is in terms of radians per second. Now, we divide this left half plane into a number of strips. Correspondingly, we divide the j omega axis into a number of sections. This section, this section, next section. For the primary strip, our omega is corresponding to this range. Now let's consider this segment of the j omega axis. That is, omega is from negative half omega_s to positive half omega_s. What's the image of this part of the j omega axis? The answer is that is also one circle. You can do a calculation here. Just use this. Anyway, this radius is always one because we are considering sigma zero. If the sigma is zero, this is one. Now, how about the angle? This angle. Now, this starts with this point. At this point, your omega is negative half omega_s. You just, this omega is negative half omega_s, radians times T. What's this answer? Look at this result. Omega times T will be two pi. Half omega_s time T will be pi, so negative half is negative pi. Just use this relationship. Now that means this point here has an image at this position. The magnitude is one, angle is negative pi here. Now, you increase your omega from negative half omega_s. Then the angle will increase. That means this angle will become less negative. That means this point would both be on this unit circle in the lower half. Until this point, this point is the origin here. Because at this position, your radius is still one, but the angle is zero degree. That's this point. Then when you increase this omega further, your angle become positive. Increase further, that will become positive. Then until this position, when omega is positive half omega_s, then you do a calculation here again. Positive half omega_s times T, that will be pi. It will go back to this point. You have one complete circle in this case. For this segment of omega axis, you get one circle. That is your angle will change from negative pi to pi. Then this strip, that means when sigma less than zero, that would be also inside the circle. This strip is called primary strip. That's the definition of primary strip. This region is mapped to inside the unit circle.

Now if you do analysis for other strips. That is, if we consider the j omega axis for your omega in this range, with the k to be non zero integer. This is the one when k is zero value. If k is a non zero integer like this, this part of the j omega axis, you still get the same circle. And those strips are called complementary strips. Actually, when you consider sampling, your sampling frequency should be fast enough to meet the Nyquist sampling theorem. Your sampling frequency should be at least twice of the bandwidth of your signal. In our case, we focus omega to be in this range. Just focus omega in this range. This is also required by our Nyquist sampling theorem. That means your omega should meet the sampling theorem condition. This is about primary strip and the complementary strip.

Let's look at the example. We have this boundary of the primary strip. We have position one here, two, three, three is when sigma is negative infinity, and four sigma is negative infinity, but at the lower part of the boundary, and five and back to the origin. Look at the image of this boundary, we have this result in the z plane. You can see for the origin, this image is here because angle is zero degree, but the magnitude is one. That's this point. When omega is increased from zero to half omega_s, then you get this semicircle, the top semicircle. That's this. Now, when omega is fixed at half omega_s, your angle is fixed at pi. But sigma is reducing from zero to negative infinity. If you use this mapping, when sigma is reducing from zero to negative infinity, then this will go to zero from one. When sigma is zero, that's one. When sigma is decreasing to negative infinity, the magnitude will go to zero. That's 2 to 3, you have this image. Now 3 to 4, the angle changes from pi to negative pi. 4 to 5, your sigma is increasing from negative infinity to zero. That's like this. The angle remains as negative pi, but the amplitude is increasing 0 to 1, and 5 to 1 is this semicircle. That's the image of this boundary.

We have the mapping of constant attenuation loci. In this case, we still have this variable, but sigma here is a constant. We have three possible cases. Sigma is sigma two, that means you have this vertical line with a positive sigma two. You have zero sigma, you have negative sigma, which is the negative sigma one. For this zero sigma, you have the unit circle, like this. With the positive sigma, sigma two, you have this big circle. Because the radius here is e to the sigma two T. Because sigma two is bigger than zero, so the radius will be bigger than one. For this vertical line, you have this circle here, and this is a negative sigma one. The radius is less than one. This is how we consider constant attenuation.

We have the settling time. I think we will come back next week to continue with this settling time mapping. So we stop here today.
