And the following is my contact details. This is my office room in S2, P2, P45, and this is my telephone number, but now very few people use telephone numbers. If you have any questions regarding this subject, you can send me e-mail. So I try to answer your questions through e-mail. If not possible, you can also have a discussion with me. In fact, at the end of each lecture, I will leave some time for you to ask a question. Our lecture starts 6:30 to 9:30. Maybe I will stop at about 9:10, then you can ask questions after that. This is a brief introduction about my contact details. If you want to know more details about me, you can visit this website.

For this subject, you can consider these two textbooks. In fact, the notes are prepared based on these two textbooks. The first four chapters is from the second textbook, and the second part will be based on the first textbook. You can get the first book from the NTU library. You can also consider some references, and there are plenty of examples and exercises in those textbooks and references for you to practice. For us to have a better understanding about this course, it is good to have some background in the knowledge of engineering mathematics. For example, complex analysis, Laplace transform. Why did I say this, because in the past, some students said they didn't study Laplace transform. That's actually a fundamental to this course.

Our course is about computer control system, which basically is about digital control system. Previously, in undergraduate studies, I believe some of you have already studied some classical continuous time control systems. For example, in NTU, students will study this course in the third year. I assume you have such knowledge, and also some background in signal and systems will be advantages. With this some background knowledge, the teaching sequence for this subject. We have 13 weeks. For the first four weeks, which will be 12 hours, I will give you lectures on discrete time system modeling and analysis. So, just some fundamentals required for this subject. Then Prof Wang to take over in week five to teach state space design measures and optimal control. He will spend five weeks to cover these topics. After this, I will come back in week ten, to consider controller design based on transfer functions. Prof Wang will consider controller design in state space and also optimal control. I will consider controller design based on transfer functions. Finally, for three hours, I will cover some topics on implementation of digital controllers. This is the teaching sequence.

For the assessment scheme, we have continuous assessment. This will be 40% of the entire grade. For this 40%, we have three quizzes. Quiz one is 10%. It will be conducted in week four. That is my first part. This is 10%. I will give you more details later about this quiz. Prof Wang will give you quiz two. He will make the arrangement. For my third part, we have quiz three, this will be 15%. I think this will be done in the week ten. In fact, for the first quiz, some of the topics in my first part won't be covered, because I will do this quiz in week four. Clearly, the lecture given in week four will not be covered. The scope will be the contents in the first three weeks, so that you have time to revise this three weeks lecture. But the week four lecture, it will be considered in my quiz three. This is about continuous assessment. You can see 40%. For final exam, it will be 60%. We have four questions. Each question will have 25 marks. You can check past year papers, especially recent year papers. We have four questions. In early time, we have five questions, but now we reduced to four questions. I set two questions. Prof Wang set two questions. This exam will be three hours. That's the assessment scheme for this subject.

Now, for the first chapter, I give you some introduction about computer control systems, or discrete time control systems. To get some background, I think we make a revision about continuous time control systems. This is a block diagram for continuous time control systems. Basically, we have the system to be controlled. You can have many examples for the system to be controlled. It can be a physical system like aircraft, like a missile or autonomous car, or even the temperature if you want to control temperature in this LT. This is the system to be controlled. It can also be social systems or economic systems. Control system has a wide applications. You can have physical system, social system, economic system, biomedical system, many systems. What do you control? You basically control the output of the system to be controlled. For example, the temperature in this room. That's the output. Of course, you must have an input variable to change this output. If for example, for DC motor, you want to control the speed of the rotation, then the output can be the rotational speed of the DC motor. Then you have to change the input to achieve your output. You can do this manually by operator. In that case, the operator will change the voltage of the DC motor, so that this speed will match the given required speed. But this is tedious. In our case, we will do this automatically by designing a controller.

The controller is the system we want to design. This is the system to be controlled. That is given. This is to be designed. We have to design this. We design this controller to change the input to the system, so that this output will follow the given reference automatically. This is a feedback control system, which is also automatic control system. You can see this reference is given. For example, maybe the temperature in this room is given to be 20 degree. You want the room temperature to be 20 degree. That's the reference input. Then you have to measure, you have a sensor to measure the temperature in the room. This is the actual output. You feed back this measurement and compare with the given reference. You get the error. For example, now the temperature is 25 degree, which is higher than the reference. You have to feed the controller, such that the output of the controller, which is the input to the system, changes this output, to track the reference input. This is the basic idea of feedback control system. You can see this is the objective. We want to make the system output and the desired reference as close as possible. That is to make the error as small as possible, this error. Ideally, this error should approach to zero. That's the accuracy of your control system.

This is a block diagram based on the physical meanings. Now, when we want to design this controller, we have to abstract our system to a mathematical model. This system, we use a model to represent it. This is a mathematical model. This model just relate the input to the output. This model the input output relationship of the system to be controlled. You have to find this model. You can find this model based on the given system, and also the given input and output. For example, for the DC motor, the input can be voltage applied to the motor. Output can be either position, angular position, or speed. You can establish a relationship between the input and output. In classical control or in continuous time control system, we use a transfer function to represent this system. That's a model for the system. That is, you have this input, through this model, you get output. For the feedback path, normally, you have a sensor to measure this. If you have unit feedback, this feedback is just a unit gain. The output is the same as this measurement here. Of course, this controller is the system we design. Basically for continuous time control system, you are finding a transfer function, D(s), as controller. That's the system you want to design.

How do we design this system? As I said, we must have the plant given. You can use physical laws to find the transfer function. Nowadays, you can use data driven approach to find the model. Of course, you must have a set of specifications. Now this, you want the system to behave as required. What specifications do we have? First requirement is stability. You want to design this controller to ensure your system is stable. That's an essential requirement, stability. If your system is unstable, then your system is not working. What does this mean for stability? We have several definitions for stability. But for linear system, all the definitions are equivalent. Basically, it means your system should ensure all the signals. You have signals in the system, to be bounded, cannot diverge. For example, you have signal u(t), that's the input, that's the output, and they have error signal. Those signals should be bounded. If one of the signals go to infinity, then it's unstable. That's the first requirement. When you have a feedback system, stability is issue to be addressed. That's an essential requirement when you design your controller. First, you have to ensure stability. That is, when you design this D(s), you have to check whether the system is stable or not. That's a topic we will study also. How do we check stability? That's the first requirement.

Second requirement is transient performance. This is a figure showing the output response. Actually, the specifications or performance can be divided into two parts, transient response, which will give you transient performance, and the steady state performance. That is when time go to infinity, then whether your output converge to the input or not. That's the steady state performance, which is when time go to infinity. Actually, you studied this type of performance in circuit analysis. When you charge RC circuit, you have time constant, then you have rise time. In RLC circuit, you may have overshoot also. It's a second order system, you have overshoot, you have rise time, settling time. Those are transient performance. That is an indication of how fast your response is, or how stable your system is. First, you have to ensure stability. But when this system is stable, maybe some case you have more stable system. Some cases you have a less stable system. That already indicated by this overshoot. If you have a large overshoot, then your system is less stable. You want this output to follow this reference. Sometimes this overshoot the reference. Especially when you have a large gain, you have a large overshoot. This is performance. We have two types of performance, transient, and the steady state tracking accuracy. That is how accurate your system is. Our ideal case is the output follow this reference in the end. That means this error approach to zero. That's the steady state performance.

In some case, you may consider optimal control. In this case, you have a cost function given. So, in many cases, you may have many controllers that can achieve this performance. While this performance can be achieved, maybe you choose one of them, which give you the best control in terms of the minimum cost. You have optimal control to consider. Prof Wang will consider optimal control in his part. This is how we designed the controller. Basically, our task of studying control system will be two parts. First part is to design controller. In this case, this is given, the system to be given, sometime you call this system as plant. Specification are also given. Based on specification, stability requirement, or sometime optimal performance index, you have to find the controller. That's design. After you finish your design, you have to do verification. Now this, you have to check whether your designed controller meet the requirement or not. This part is called analysis. So we have design and analysis for control system. When we study control system, we have two major tasks, design and analysis. Analysis, after you do the design, after you get this D, you have to study the overall system to check stability, and transient performance, and steady state performance and so on. That are the two essential task we will consider. This is about, not necessarily continuous time system. For any control system, we have such two tasks.

Now, if your controller is implemented using analog devices, such as resistors, capacitors, inductors, and operational amplifiers, together with some necessary mechanical components, then your system is continuous time system. That is all the signals in the system will be continuous time. That is u(t), y(t), error signal, the sensor output all continuous time. This is continuous time system. Now, there are some disadvantages for such system. This device may be expensive or not durable. We have to find alternative ways to implement this controller. Now is to implement this designed controller. How do we do that? We can use computer to do implementation. In this case, we have this block diagram. This is a computer controlled system or discrete time control system. This plant is still the same as this. That is the system to be controlled, is unchanged. If it's a DC motor then, here is still, and this is also DC motor. The only difference is the controller part. We want to implement this controller using computer or digital device. Our computer can operate on digital signals. In this case, you'll have analog to digital conversion. Continuous signal, convert to digital signal. Then your computer process this digital signals. Actually, in this case, your computer is just to do a programming to implement this controller. It's a programming to operate on this signal, and then you have this control signal. But this output from the computer is still digital. In this case, you have to convert this digital signal to continuous time signal. You have a DAC and the zero order hold to get this continuous time signal.

This is our computer control system or discrete time control system. This means our controller here operates in discrete time. But the plant or the system to be controlled is still operating in continuous time. This is more complicated in design and analysis because you have both types of signals. Now they are discrete time signal or continuous time signal. Whereas, for continuous time control system, all signals are continuous time. The design and analysis will be simpler than this. You have to consider ADC, DAC, and so on. Actually, this is a simplified block diagram. For more complicated ones, you have quantization. This is introduction about discrete time control systems.

Of course, for this case, you have some advantages. For example, our computer implementation will be cheaper. You just do a programming. The implementation is cheaper and easier. Even if you have more complicated control algorithms, you just do a programming. For example, nowadays, you have adaptive control algorithms, non linear control algorithms, AI algorithms also. It's hard to use analog device to implement such control schemes. Then if you use a computer, you just write a few line of programs. The implementation is easier. And you can also reprogram your control schemes. Later on you want to change your control results. Then you just rewrite a program. Whereas for analog control system, when this D(s) is changed, then you have to use different device, except when you change the parameter. Sometimes you have to change the algorithm as well. For example, the simple case is P control. But later you want to have PID control, then you have to change this device. But in our case, if you change the control algorithm, you just do reprogramming. That's easy. Actually, for the same processor, you can have different control schemes implemented. In this case, maybe you have multi output system. That means you may have more than one controller to be implemented. Then you just do program with several different programs in the same processor. There are lots of advantages. That's an introduction about our computer control system, which are to be studied in this course.

Now, as I just mentioned, for our computer system, we have signals involved. We have control signal, output signal, error signal, and so on. Now, I will classify the types of signals to be considered. First, you should know what is signal. Signal is just a physical quantity that varies as a function of an independent variable. For example, temperature. The temperature can change with time. This time is an independent variable. But sometimes the independent variable can be space. For example, the temperature here may be different from the temperature at the back. But in our course, we will consider time as an independent variable. If you want to study more advanced control, in that case you have more than one variable, is more complicated.

Now, what is the continuous time signal? In this diagram, this u(t) and the y(t) will be continuous time signals, because their time is continuous. It's called continuous time signal. Over a continuous range of time, will be continuous time signal. This is the keyword, continuous range of time. But the amplitude can be continuous or can be discrete. For example, like this. This is a signal x(t). t is continuous. x is the amplitude or is the function. This function is also continuous. In this case, we have a name for this, is called analog signal. That means, this type of signal is continuous both in time and the amplitude. As I just mentioned, the amplitude can be discrete. For example, a discrete signal. This is a discrete signal. In this case, your signal x(t) can take some values. For example, the number of students in this LT, can it be integer, cannot be decimal. You cannot say 0.5 student. This is a quantized signal. But the time, you see this t is still continuous. For continuous time signal, the function itself can be continuous or non continuous like this. In fact, in our control system, we have a step signal or called unit step function. That is a continuous time signal if it is continuous. But the unit step function, there is a jump. The amplitude is not necessarily continuous. In many cases, we just use continuous time in lieu of analog, even though the two are not exactly the same. Actually, there is a difference between analog signal and continuous time signal. But in many cases, we treat them equally. But if you really want to differentiate these two signals, this is the difference. Analog can be both continuous in time and the amplitude. But continuous time can have discrete amplitude.

This is the definition of quantized signal. How do we obtain the quantized signal? The process is called quantization. Quantization is a process. Now this, to change your variable to a set of distinct values. For example, for our computer, to do calculation, this quantity should be quantized. You have a certain number of bits involved. This is a quantized signal. But in our course, we don't consider quantization. Actually, in practice, in practical computer control systems, you have quantizer involved. So that's a continuous time signal.

Now we have discrete time signal. Discrete time signal is the independent variable t is discrete, is not continuous. But the amplitude can also be continuous or discrete. For example, this sampled data signal is discrete time signal. You can see that the time is discrete, is not continuous. But the amplitude is continuous, because the signal is obtained by sampling a continuous time signal. This amplitude can be any value. No limitation on the amplitude. This is a periodically sampled signal. That means, your sampling instance, t_k can be represented as k times T. This k is an integer and the T is a fixed constant, called sampling period. For example, here, when k zero, that's this t zero sampling instant. Then there is first sampling instant, second sampling instant and so on. This is a periodic sample because T is a fixed constant. In our course, we will study the periodical sampling. For more advanced control systems, you can have non periodic sample. For example, nowadays, if you read research paper, you can find the so called event triggered system. In that case, you sample your signal when certain conditions are satisfied. You get a non periodic sample in that case. For simplicity, in our course, we just studied periodic sample. That's sampled data signal, because the amplitude can be any value.

But we also have the definition of digital signals. These are the signals with a discrete time and the amplitude. The time is discrete and the amplitude also discrete. You can see they can only take certain values. Is quantized value. Normally, in practical computer control systems, we first do sampling. After you do sampling, you have to do quantization to convert the sampled data signal to quantized signal for the computer here to do process. This is the two types of discrete time signals. In summary, we have discrete time signals and the continuous time signals for computer control systems. As I said, in our case, we do not consider quantization. We treat both digital signals and the sampled signals equally as discrete time signals.

Here is an example. This is more than this simplified block diagram. You can see you have the plant to be controlled. This is the input to the plant. It's continuous. The output is continuous. You have transducer or sensor. This is also continuous. The reference is normally continuous, so you have this. This is the error, that's continuous time. Then you have sampling, and the quantization to convert this continuous time signal to digital signals, binary codes like this. This is a digital signal, then digital computer process this digital signal, and the output is also digital. Then you have DA converter. This is still discrete time signal because the time is just convert binary maybe to decimal. The discrete time, then you have to use a hold circuit to change this discrete time signal to continuous time. This is applied to actuator to drive or to control the plant. That's typical digital control system.

Now let's look at the example. We consider the control of DC servo system through a computer. We have this picture showing the control system here. This is a very old computer. Actually, this was the time when I did my PhD. At that time, the computer is like this. We have the motor here. This is the motor. DC motor. We have to drive the motor shaft. The motor is rotating. We have to control the position of the motor shaft. The output in this case is the angular position. The output is the output shaft position. We want this position to follow a given reference y(t). That's the objective. We have to design controllers to achieve this. To illustrate the control performance, we did the computer simulation with two different controllers. And the reference trajectory is a square wave. Now this is the y star here. That's the reference signal, is a square wave. This is the response with one of the control scheme. This blue line is the reference. That's the y star. Then the green line is the actual position. So you can see when this is the reference, change from one to negative one, then the output, which is the shaft position, behave like this, and eventually it will approach to the reference. Then at this time, the desired output is changed from one to negative one, from negative one to one. Is this then the output position behave like this with one control algorithm. If we revise a control algorithm, revise the control scheme, then we have this response. You can see for both cases, the system are stable, because there is no divergence. Also the output approach to the desired reference at the steady state, you see here. We have zero steady state error for both cases. However, this response is better than this, because the overshoot here is smaller, more stable, nothing means this is more stable. This is more oscillatory. How do we achieve this instead of this? That is the course to be studied. We have to design suitable controllers, based on the specification. Actually, you are given the specification, such as overshoot, rise time, and so on, and the steady state error. You have to use this, and also the given plant like this DC motor. Based on this, you have to find a suitable controller to achieve such results. This is about the introduction.

Now, to do the design, as I said, our main task to study the system will be design and analysis. Two major task. To do this two task, we need some fundamentals. The first fundamental is z transform. I believe you studied the Laplace transform. For digital systems, we will study z transform, and we will use z transform to do modeling. You see here, you have to find the transfer function. You have to model this system, to do the modeling, and also to design the controller. This part is a control algorithm to be designed. If you consider z transform, later on, when you do modeling, this transfer function is a pulse transfer function in terms of z transform. And this controller design is also pulse transfer function in terms of z transform. z transform is a fundamental tool to be used.

Now in this chapter, we will study the following topics. Of course, I give you a short introduction, maybe just half minutes. Then I give you the definition of z transform. Then I will consider the z transform of a few elementary functions. And then I will establish some important properties and theorems of z transform. Of course, we have inverse z transform, and we finally apply z transform measures to solve difference equations. In fact, one application of Laplace transform is to solve differential equations. That's in continuous time, you have differential equation. In discrete time domain, you will have difference equation. These are the topics to be studied in this Chapter two. Today, I think I will go through the four topics and part of this inverse z transform.

Just now, I said z transform is a mathematical tool for the analysis and the design of discrete time control systems. That's why we need to study this transform because it's a mathematical tool. Just like Laplace transform is an important tool for us to study continuous time control system. z transform will convert difference equation to algebraic equations. Just like Laplace transform will convert differential equation to algebra equation.

Now, I already mentioned discrete time signals. If you have a continuous time signal x(t), you do sampling, you'll have this sequence, x(0), x(T), x(2T), x(kT) and so on. k is an integer. In this case, for discrete signal, k will be independent variable. This T is the sampling period. Sometimes we just consider number sequence without this T. You have this just number sequence x(0), x(1), x(2), and so on. Our z transform will be defined by using the discrete time signal or number sequence.

I give you the formal definition of z transform. This is the definition of z transform for continuous time signal. This z transform is also applicable to continuous time signal. x(t) is in fact a continuous time signal. But you have to sample this x(t) to get x(kT). Even though x(t) is a continuous time, you just need to use the sampled values. In this case, this is x(kT), and this is the notation for the z transform of x, and this is denoted as X(z), which is calculated by using this formula. It's x(k) times z to the negative k, for k from zero to infinity, added together. If you do this addition in the end, this is a function of z, and this z is a complex variable. That's the definition. Basically, you have two different representations for the same signal. This is time representation, actually is continuous continuous time. If you sample it, you get discrete time kT. This kT is represented in time domain, with k as an independent variable. If you consider z transform, it will convert this time domain signal to a X(z). This z is a complex variable. That's the definition. You just use kT to do this calculation to have this answer. Now, if we just have a sequence, then you don't have to consider this kT, so it's this definition. This is the z transform for our course.

Actually, in terms of mathematics, you have two sided z transform. Our course is just one sided z transform, because when t is less than zero, we treat x(t) as zero. In mathematics, you have this definition. But we assume x(kT) is zero for negative k. We just have this. This is the definition. Based on this definition, I will find z transforms of a few signals. Actually, before that, you can also do expansion of this summation. If you do expansion, this is the same as this. This is a compact representation of the summation, and this is an expanded version. In fact, from this, you can see that the coefficient of z to the negative k is x(kT). This is in fact the inverse transform of this X(z). x(kT) is the inverse z transform corresponding to the kth sampling instant. This is one of the approach to find the inverse transform. Later on, we will consider this. Anyway, this is just the definition of z transform.

Now let's look at some examples. First, we consider the z transform of unit step function. As I just mentioned, our z transform is not just for discrete time signals, but it can also be applied to continuous time signals. This unit step function is a continuous time signal given here. This is the definition of unit step. In our subject, we use 1(t) to denote unit step function. I think in mathematics they use u(t). We don't use u(t) because our u(t) is the control signal here. To avoid confusion, we use 1(t) to denote unit step function. This is the definition, and this is a graph for the unit step function, for t less than zero, that's zero, for t bigger than one is one. This is a continuous time, and the x(t) is just one, 1(t) for t bigger than zero.

Now let's look at the z transform of this signal by using the definition here. To find z transform, first, you have to do sampling. If you sample this signal, you will have this x(kT). Because this x(t) is one for all t bigger than zero. 1(kT) will also be one for all non negative integers. This is also showing in the graph. When k is zero, that's one. When k is T, that's one, that's the sample value. When k is 2T, that's also one. x(t) is the continuous time signal, and those dots are the sample values, which will give you 1(kT). That's the sample value.

Now, we calculate z transform by using this definition here. From the definition, our x(kT) is just one here. You do a substitution. You get this one here. Then times z to the negative k, k is from zero to infinity. One times z to the negative k same as z to the negative k. This is same as this after you do expansion. When k zero, that's one, when k one, that's z inverse. When k is two, you have z inverse square and so on. Then this can be found as 1 over (1 minus z inverse). You know why? Because z inverse, z inverse square, and so on is a geometric sequence. The starting term is one, so that's one here. And the common ratio is just the z inverse. This is the common ratio. You have this. That's the summation, and you multiply z in both numerator and denominator, you get this. That's the z transform of unit step function. Actually, to get this, you have a condition. That is this magnitude should be less than one. That is the common ratio should be less than one. This is required in signal processing. But in our control system, we don't use this condition. Because in our control system, when we design our controller, we should ensure stability. If you can ensure the stability of the system, this condition will be automatically satisfied. But if you consider signal processing, in that case, you don't design controller. You need this condition to be satisfied. In our control system, we will design controller to make this satisfied. That's why we have an essential requirement for our control system. In the future part of this course, I don't use this condition. This condition, as I said, is ensured by stability. If your system is unstable, then you have divergence, then this cannot be done. That's the z transform of the unit step function.

Now, let's consider another typical signal called unit ramp function. This is the definition of unit ramp. For t negative, x(t) zero, for t bigger than zero, x(t) is t. If you do it graphically, this is a straight line, starting from the origin. It's like this for continuous time signal. It would be a straight line, starting from the origin, gradient is one, because this gradient is one. That's the continuous time signal. Now you do sampling. Get x(T), x(2T), x(3T), and x(4T). x(kT) is just kT. You just change this t to kT. You have this x(kT). That's the sample value for k from zero to infinity. You see k is zero, that's this. When k is one, that's just T. That's the sample values. Then we use this definition. We can find z for this function. X(z) is the z transform of t. This is the unit ramp, and we use the definition, we change x(kT) to kT. Because our x(kT) is kT. And this T is constant, so you can move this out. You have this. Then you do a summation of this. Or you do expansion, you get this, and this summation is basically equal to that. That's the z transform for ramp function. This z transform is dependent on T as you can see. In general, your z transform is dependent on the sampling period. But if you just consider number sequence, you just use this definition here. In this case, you don't have this T involved. In this case, you get this z transform. This is just equal to one in this case. That's unit ramp.

And we have polynomial function, which is a number sequence. This is the definition of polynomial function in our context. Maybe it's different from the polynomial defined in mathematics. Actually just a to the k. a is a constant. This is just a constant. You use the definition here. You can find the z transform of a to the k. You just do a substitution. x(k) is changed to a to the k. You can combine these two together and move this index k out. You get this (a z inverse) to the k. This can be expanded into this. Again, this is the summation of a geometric sequence with the ratio a z inverse. This one is from this first term, divided by one minus the common ratio. That's the z transform for this polynomial function.

Now we have exponential function. This is the exponential function. e to the minus a t. This a is also constant. Now, you do sampling. You get x(kT), just change this t to kT, this k is a non negative integer. You use the definition in 2.1. You substitute this two here. You have this. Again, you move this k out as we did here. This is (e to the minus aT times z inverse) to the k. Then this summation will be equal this because the first term, when k is zero, that's one. And the common ratio is e to the minus aT times z inverse. You have this, which is the same as this. You multiply z in both numerator and denominator to have that. Actually, if you define this e to the minus aT as b, you can use this result also. Because this e to the minus akT can be written as (e to the minus aT) to the k. And this is b, so it's b to the k. Then you can use this result to have the answer. That's exponential function.

Now, we have sinusoidal function. For example, this sine omega t, for t bigger than zero. When t is negative, is zero. How do we find this z transform? Can we still use the definition here? Of course, when you do sampling, you will have x(kT) as sine omega kT. Change this t to kT. You have this. Now you substitute this to the function here. Can we find the summation easily, like what we did earlier? It's not so easy. I will come back after a break. We have 20 minutes break. You come back at around 8:00 P.M.

Okay, let's start again. How do we find the z transform for sine? If you directly use the definition, it's very hard to compute the summation. If I replace x(kT) by sine omega kT, I don't think it is simple to compute the final result. How do we find the result for the z transform of sine omega t? We will use this exponential function. This function has its z transform obtained just now. If you recall the Euler formula. Sine omega t can be written as e to the j omega t, e to the minus j omega t. Basically, we have this Euler formula. e to the j alpha equals cosine alpha plus j sine alpha. And e to the minus j alpha equals cosine alpha minus j sine alpha. To get the sine alpha, you just subtract the first identity by this second identity. This minus this, you get twice, two times j times the sine alpha. So sine alpha would be 1 over 2j, e to the j alpha minus e to the minus j alpha. This formula can be applied here with our alpha being omega t. This omega t is our alpha.

Now, based this result. That is the result we just obtain. We can have the z transform for this function. We apply this z transform of this right side. Replace sine omega t. Now, we have an important property for z transform. That is the linear property. Later on, I will show you the linear property. Actually, the linear property can be proved by using the definition of z transform. Linear property means the z transform of this subtraction divided by this constant equals this. You just move the constant out. You have this. Then this z transform equals the z transform of this difference is the difference of this two z transform. This is the linear property of z transform. This one, this z transform can be found from here. e to the j omega t is actually, this a, you have e to the minus at. This a is just same as negative j omega. For this, our a is just j omega. You change this a respectively. You have these two terms. This a, for the first term, this negative a is j omega. For the second term, this a is just j omega, so it's a negative j omega t here. It's just a direct application of this result to obtain these two terms. Now, you do subtraction of two terms. You have this result. This is a fraction subtraction. You have a common denominator by multiplying these two denominators. Then for the first term, you have to multiply this denominator. For the second term, you have to multiply this denominator. In the numerator here, you have to do this. This minus this. One is canceled out. What you have is the second term, this first term become positive. The first term, and the z inverse is moved out. We have this. For the denominator, you do a multiplication. We have this three terms. For the first term is just one times one. For the second term is the coefficient of z inverse. This one times one plus one times negative of this, minus the summation of these two terms. And this second term times the second term, will give you z inverse square. This multiply with this, this times this is one. Inverse times inverse, you get z inverse square. Now, what is this subtraction? You use this answer again, this result. So this minus this would be two j times sine omega t. The j comes out with this two. You have sine omega t here, and they have z inverse, that's the z inverse copied here. That's the numerator. This minus this would be two sine omega t. For the denominator, you just simplify it. This plus this answer. Use this again. If you plus this two, you have two cosine. This plus this is two cosine alpha. Therefore, this plus this is two cosine omega t. So that's this and the z transform for this sine. Now, you can multiply z square in both numerator and denominator to have the z transform in terms of z or positive z powers. That's the manner to find the z transform for sine omega t.

Now for cosine omega t, you do the same. Because cosine omega t, according to this Euler formula, is e to the j omega t plus e to the minus j omega t divided by two. You use linear property, half is moved out. Then inside the bracket, you have z transform of e to the j omega t plus the z transform of e to the negative j omega t. You apply this formula again, these two terms respectively, and then simplify, have this answer. That's the z transform for cosine omega t.

Now, let's look at some examples. This is a Laplace transform given. And you want to find the z transform corresponding to this Laplace transform. What we do is to find the time domain signal from the given Laplace. You take an inverse Laplace, you have this answer. I believe you know how to find the inverse Laplace transform. This will give you x(t) like this. Now, the form of this time function would be e to the... the z transform of ones minus the z transform of e to the negative t. We know the transform, which one is the unit step function. For the exponential function, we have this z transform here. We get these two terms. This unit step function give you this z transform, then minus this term with our a as one, this a here is one. You get this. Then you simplify, you get this answer. In terms of z, you get this. That's the z transform corresponding to the given Laplace transform.

In our final exam, this table is given. Unless required specifically, you can use this z transform table to find your z transform. Specifically means, for example, find the z transform based on the definition. In that case, you cannot use the table. Without such requirement, you can use the table. But you should know how to use the table. For example, the z transform of this function is one. This is called the delta function or impulse in discrete domain. This is a unit step function. This is the exponential function. This is a ramp. This is a sinusoidal function, cosine. For this one is Laplace transform. There is a condition here stated at the end of the table. That is, your x(t) is zero for negative t, or x(k) is zero for k less than zero. For all these z transforms showing here, the corresponding k should be mentioned here. In fact, for this third line here is only applicable to this case. In this case, k is one, two, three, for this case. For other cases, k is 0, 1, 2, 3 and so on. This is a z transform table.

Next, we consider some important properties and theorems of the z transform. Assume the z transform of x(t) is X(z). Then we have this property called multiplication by constant. In fact, just now we used this result. You see here, this is multiplied by a constant. For this function multiply this constant. This constant is moved out. This is the property here. You have a times x(t). Then the z transform of this product is just a times the z transform of x(t). In other words, this a can be moved out. We use this, it's a X(z). You can prove this easily by using the definition of z transform here. If you multiply a here, this a, they have a here, so this a can be moved out.

Next property is linear property. As I just mentioned, I also used this property here. If you have two constant alpha and beta. You are looking for the z transform of this linear combination, alpha f plus beta g. The result is alpha times X(z) plus beta times G(z). Which was used here? You see? This is linear property. Again, if we want to do a proof, you just use the definition. This definition will give you the linear property.

If you consider multiplication by a to the k, k is the non negative integer, which is an independent variable. Then the z transform of this a to the k times x(k) will be equal to this. Of course, your X(z) is the z transform of x(k). This X is the z transform of this. In other words, you just change this z to a inverse z. You have the answer. Again, you can prove this by the definition. You just consider this definition because this is a number sequence. Based on that definition, the z transform of a to the k times x(k) will be a to the k times x(k) here. Then times z to the negative k from the definition. This a to the k can be combined with the z to the negative k. We have x(k) times this. If you work out the sum, the answer of this, the z transform of x(k) will be X(z). But now z is changed to this. We have this answer. That's how we do the proof.

Next, we have an important theorem called shifting or translation theorem. Assume your x(t) is zero for negative t, and this signal is a sample with a sampling period T. The z transform of this signal is this. This is the notation for the z transform of x(t). Now, for non negative integer n, the z transform of x(t minus nT) is z to the negative n X(z). Actually, this is a function delayed by n sampling period, n is non negative integer here. You can see that multiplication by z inverse is equivalent to delaying one step in time. That means if your n is one, you have x(t minus T). The signal is delayed by one sample in period. The corresponding z transform is just z inverse X(z). In the future, you can see that if you multiply by z inverse, the corresponding inverse z transform would be delayed by one sample. That's the meaning. Multiplication by z inverse is equivalent to delaying one step in time. This is an important way to implement our digital controller. We will consider this in the implementation part. This is for delay.

Now, in some cases, you have advance like this. Your signal x(t) is advanced by n, that's n sampling period. In this case, the corresponding z transform will be equal to this. It's more complicated than this. Here, you just have one. But this one, you have to do subtraction here. You have this subtraction, x(kT) z to the negative k, added together for k from zero to n minus one. This n is the integer given here. Now, from this result, you can see multiply by z is equivalent to advance one step in time. When n equals one, you have z, z times X(z). Of course, here, you have an initial condition here. When k is zero, that's one, then you have x(0). If it's a zero initial condition, it's equivalent to advance one step in time, because this n is one. Is advanced by one sample in period. This is the interpretation of these two results. We have two results. One is for delay, and the other is for the advance in time. This right side is the z transform.

Now let's do a proof. We prove 2.7 first. We just use the definition of z transform given here. The z transform of x(t minus nT) is the same as this summation. You just change t to kT to get the sample value. You have the sample this signal. So change to that according to the definition here. This sum change to this. Now let's do a calculation. This is the same as this. Why do I do this? I just want to match this k here to match k minus n by adding a value and minus value. What's the value is n. I just want to match the integer in the bracket. Let me do a calculation for you. Basically, this k, I want to change this k to negative k minus n, because here is k minus n. If I want to do this change, I have to plus n. If plus n, you have to minus n to keep this to be the same as the original z to the negative k. This is a change to that. Maybe you have a basis. z to the negative k. This first term is kept here. Then second term here, minus n is equivalent to z to the n. But n is fixed integer. z to the n. This is the same as z to the negative (k minus n) z to the negative n. This is a constant. When you consider the summation here, the summation here is with respect to k. k is changing. This is moved out to get this. That's the first calculation we need to do to match k minus n here. You see, you have k minus n.

After we do this, we are going to do variable change. We define k minus n as a new variable m. This summation is with respect to k. k is variable. Just like when we do integration, you have an integral variable. You do variable change for the summation by letting a new integer m as k minus n. This change to that. Of course, when you do the variable change, you have to find the lower bound and the upper bound. You see here k is from zero to infinity. When k is zero, your m is negative n. When k is infinite, your m is also infinite. This is x(t). Of course, this is zero for negative m. This is a variable change. Now, we have to use this result. x(t) is zero for negative t. This term here can be split into two parts. This summation can be split into Sigma from negative n to negative one. Of course, you have this function here, I don't have to write that. This second part is from zero to infinity. Now, for the first part, or first term here, it is zero, because m is negative. You see, m is from negative n to negative one. That's negative. For negative m, your x is zero. Use this. This is a change to that. You just have this second term left for this summation. What is this? This is the same as our definition of the z transform. It only changes the variable here. In our case, m is from zero to infinity. Here is k from zero to infinity, is the same. This is our X(z). Therefore, this result is proved. That's the proof for 2.7.

Now, for 2.8, we will do the proof similarly, as we did here. First, we have to match. First, we have to change this t to kT and then match the variables and then variable change. For 2.8, this is 2.8 here. The z transform of this function is obtained by definition. You just change this t to kT. You are using the sample values. Here is k plus n, kT plus nT. We have to do this matching. Basically you have to minus n and then plus n. Then when you consider the z to the n, it is moved out. Same as what we did there. This is kT plus nT and here is z to the (k plus n). Also two variable change, we let k plus n as new integer variable m. This summation will be changed to this. This term change to the first term. With this variable change will be equal to this. Why? Because when k is zero, your m is n, so that's equals n. When k is infinite, your m would be infinity. kT plus nT would be mT, k plus n is m. That's the result for this summation. But this is starting from n, which is different from the definition of z transform. To match this definition, we have to add this term. Now this, we add the summation of x(mT) z to the negative m for m from zero to n minus one. At the same time, you have to minus this term. We just do addition and subtraction. With this addition, you can combine the first two terms to match the z transform definition. Here's from zero to n minus one. Here is from n to infinity. You combine this two, you get this. Of course, you should copy this one here. This is our X(z). This is from the definition. Then you get this answer. Basically, just change this m to k, this m to k. You have the result. This is the second formula in the shifting theorem.

If x is a number sequence, we don't have the sampling period involved. Then for the z transform of x(k plus n), it will be this. Actually, this would be x(k plus n). Maybe we make a correction because the number sequence. So this should be x(k). We don't do sampling. It's discrete already because the number sequence. This is the same as this. You multiply z to the n to each of these two terms. You have this answer. Then when n is one, you have this result, n is one, that's z, x, this would be zero. You just have x(0) times z here. This n is one. When n is two, you have two additional term. For general case, when this is n, you have n additional term. This depending on initial values. Just like Laplace transform, you have similar properties for the z transform. That's the shifting theorem.

Now let's look at the example. You want to find the z transform of 1(t minus T). This 1(t) is the unit step function. 1(t minus T) means this is delayed. This unit step function is delayed by one sampling period. That's the first function. For the second function, the unit step function is delayed by four sampling period. This is the graphic representation of this function. We want the z transform of these two functions. You just use the shifting theorem. That's given 2.7. This is a delayed version for this. For the first case, n is one. The z transform of this first function is z inverse times the z transform of the unit step function. The z transform for this unit step function is 1 over (1 minus z inverse). That's the answer. For the second function, n is four. You apply the formula in 2.7 again. You have z to the negative four times the z transform of unit step function, which is equal to this.

Now, we have another example. This is a number sequence. f(k) defined in this way. When k is negative or zero, is zero. When k is a positive integer, one, two, three, and so on, a to the (k minus 1). You have to find the z transform of this sequence. You can consider this f(k) as a to the k delayed by one step. If you look at the definition of a to the k, for k bigger than or equal to zero, it will be a to the k, for k less than zero that's zero. With this definition, your f(k) is this function delayed by one step. Then you apply the delay theorem. The z transform this is a z inverse times the z transform of a to the k, and we know the z transform of a to the k, which is 1 over (1 minus a z inverse). We derived this earlier. That's the result.

Another example. You are given x(h) with h being zero, one, two, three, and so on. We define a new function y(k) as the summation of x(h) for h from zero to k. This is similar to our integration. Maybe if you recall integration, for example, in integration, you have maybe x(t) from zero to t. Then you have this y(t) defined as this. This is a continuous version, integration. Then for discrete version, this is summation, similar to this. What we're going to do is to find the z transform of y(k) in terms of X(z). I think you know the Laplace transform for this. Remember Laplace for y(t) in terms of the Laplace, you have this result, Y equals one over s, X(s). Laplace transform property. Now, for this, we have similar properties. How do we find the z transform of y(k)? For this, from this definition, in terms of X(z). This, we rewrite y(k) in this form. This is the definition of y(k). We just expand this. Actually, you can do, your y(k) is just x(0) plus x(1), plus x(k minus 1) and plus x(k). This is our y(k). Now, how about this terms, for k from zero to k minus one, you have k terms here. What's this? This is actually y(k minus 1). This can be written as these two terms, this term is just y(k minus 1). And the other term here is just x(k). We have this equation y(k) equals y(k minus 1) plus x(k), and we are looking for Y(z) in terms of X(z). We take z transform on both sides of this equation. We will have Y here, y(k) will give you Y(z). How about this? You use the shifting property. This is delayed by one step. This will be z inverse Y(z). Of course, the z transform of x(k) is X(z) as given here. Y(z) would be equal to this. You just solve this equation, you have this Y(z). You can see this 1 over (1 minus z inverse) is our integrator in time domain, or in discrete time domain. That's similar to this. You have an integrator in time domain, or s domain that's one over s. In z domain, integrator is 1 over (1 minus z inverse). We will consider this later. That's a property for this summation. Similar to the Laplace transform property of integration.

Next, we have a complex translation theorem. This z transform will be obtained as X(z e to the aT). In other words, you found the z transform x(t) as X, then you just change the corresponding z to this. You have the z transform of this function. You can prove this. This is the function given here, and you can see that the z transform of this is found by definition. You sample this continuous time signal by changing t to kT. This t to kT, t to kT. You combine these two terms. You will have this. You move the e to the aT k out. You can see the result of this is just the z transform of x(kT) with z changed to this. That's how we do the proof. In our definition of z transform, here's z. This will give you X(z). Now, this z is changed to z e to the aT. You just do corresponding change in your answer. Actually, you can also prove this using alternative method. You have this signal sampled to have this sample values, and that's equivalent to this. You can define this as b. You define this e to the aT as b. You can use the earlier property, you get the same result here.

This is an important theorem also. You can use the theorem to find the z transform of these two functions. We have the z transform of sine omega t and also cosine omega t. Now, if you multiply e to the minus at in front, you have this result. You find the z transform of sine omega t first. After that, you change your z to z e to the aT, according to our theorem. The z transform of sine omega t has been found to be this. Then, you replace every z. You have z here. You have to replace these three z by z e to the aT. You get this answer. Actually, that's also given in the z transform table. You can see that from here. e to the minus at sine omega t will give you this z transform. Similarly, for this one with cosine, you can use the z transform of cosine to obtain the answer by this substitution. Every z, you have three z here, you have to change all of them to z e to the aT. Change to that, this inverse, this is the inverse square. Then you do a calculation, it will be that. That's the same as this here. That's translation theorem.

One more example is to find the z transform of t times e to the minus at. This time you use the z transform of t, you can get the answer. We know the z of t is this function derived earlier. You change this z to z e to the aT. You have this result.

Another important result is called initial value theorem. Assume the z transform of x(t) is X(z), and the limit of X(z), when z equal to infinity exists. Then this limit is x(0). If you want to find the initial value of x, you just use the limit here. How do we prove this? You just use the definition. This is the definition of z transform. That's the expanded version. When z go to infinite, this term go to zero, this term equal to zero, you only have x(0) left. You have this result. Because when you take a limit, all this go to zero. You just have x(0). This is a convenient way to check the correctness of z transform you determine. For example, you have this X(z) given, and you want to find x(0). How do we do that? You don't have to take inverse z transform to get x(0). You just take the limit of this, when z go to infinity. This is the X(z). x(0) is limit of this given X(z), when z go to infinity. Let's look at the numerator. When z go to infinity, the numerator will go to zero. For the denominator, this one, the second term go to zero, one minus zero is one. Similarly for this, that go to zero, one minus zero is one. Therefore, the answer is zero. Zero divide by one is zero. That's the x(0). You can also verify this. Earlier, we have found the z transform of this function. If you look at the example earlier, example 2.1, you can see that when t is zero, your x(0) is zero. This is the initial value theorem.

Next, we have an important theorem also. Before that, we give you the definition of poles and zeros in the z plane. Normally, our z transform would be a rational function like this. You have a numerator and denominator with the order of the numerator less than or equal to the order of the denominator. You can factorize the numerator and denominator to have this form. You have factors for the numerator. You have n factors in the denominator. Of course, some of these numbers z1, z2, and p1, p2, pn, may be complex numbers. Because this is an nth order polynomial for the denominator, it has roots. You have n roots, but some of these roots may be complex. In this case, our p1, p2, pn are called the poles of X(z). They are the solutions of D(z) equals zero, the roots of the polynomial in the denominator. This z is z1, z2 up to zn are the zeros. They are the solutions of N(z) equal zero. These are the definition of poles and zeros.

Now, with this, we have the final value theorem given here. Suppose our x(k) is zero for negative k, and the z transform of x is X(z). Assume all the poles of X(z) are inside the unit circle with one exception, that a simple pole is at z equal one. Then x(infinity), that is x as k tends to infinity, would be equal to the limit of this (1 minus z inverse) times X(z), when z tends to one. This is a very important theorem. As I mentioned in the beginning, one of the property for control system is steady state performance. That is as t go to infinity. Normally we want the tracking error to approach zero, as t go to infinity. That is as k go to infinity. To find such steady state value, you can use final value theorem. This is an important way to find the accuracy of your control system. That is the steady state performance. Why do we have this condition? This condition is to ensure the limit exist. If this condition is not satisfied, your x(k) has no limit, when k go to infinity. Maybe in this case, your right side has a limit, but the left side may not have a limit if the condition given here is not satisfied. We have all poles inside the unit circle. What is unit circle. Is a circle centered at the origin, radius one. This is in the z plane. But you have one possible exception. That is X(z) can have a simple pole at z equals one. I will show you some examples of this.

Now let's do a proof. Of course, we cannot do anything on the left side. When we do proof, we work on the right side, and we show the right side is equal to this. Because left side is just one term, so we cannot do anything. We consider the right side. We have two terms. One is X(z), which is defined as this. The other is z inverse X(z). The z inverse X(z) is in fact the z transform of x(k minus 1). This is the result of shifting theorem. The z transform of x(k minus 1) is defined as this. This, you have two terms on the right side. Now you do subtraction, because here is the subtraction of these two terms. You do subtraction, this minus this. You will have basically X(z) minus z inverse X(z). This is before you take a limit. Now, I put this term here for easy reference before I move to the next page. Actually, this is just the right side before we take a limit. We are going to consider this and the next page. Now, because we work on the right side, the right side should take a limit. You take a limit. This is the limit for this, when z tends to one, and this is exactly, after we take a limit here, is exactly the right side of 2.16. Now, we work on the left side. If z go to one, what's this term? This go to one, you have x(k) left. Same, this, this will go to one. You have x(k minus 1) left. The left side will change to this. x(k) from this first term, x(k minus 1) from the second term, and both the summation for k from zero to infinity. You can combine this two term into this after you take the limit of z approaching one. Now you do expansion of this summation. When k is zero, you have x(0) minus x(minus 1). When k is one, you will have x(1) minus x(0). When k is two, you have this. Then you continue until k equals infinity. Now, you do our observation of the additions. x(0) is canceled out with this x(0) in the next bracket. x(1) is canceled out with this x(1). What do we have? We have two terms left. One term is this cannot be canceled out, the other term cannot be canceled out. What is the other term, x(infinity). We have these two terms. What's the value here? Look at the condition here. x(k) is zero for negative k. Our k here is negative one. That's zero. Therefore, use this condition. We have x(infinity). This is x(infinity), which is the same as this. This is how we prove the final value theorem.

Now, we have proved this result. Next, we make some discussions about the result. I already mentioned that this is a very useful result, which means you can compute the limit of your x(k), when k go to infinity without finding the inverse. Normally, when you do analysis of your designed control system, you need to find the accuracy of your control system. This final value theorem can be used to find the steady state accuracy. So this is a useful result. Of course, when you apply the result, you have to be careful. Now this, you have to check the conditions of the theorem. There are two important cases the limit does not exist. First, if you have unbounded sequence, in this case, your x(k) will go to infinity. That means in this case, your system is unstable. If we have an unstable system, you cannot apply this theorem because your x(k) may go to infinity or be unbounded. I can show you some of the z transforms given in the table. z transform table. I just showed you. Maybe I show you this one. For example, for this function here. What is the pole of this z transform? If we make the denominator zero and solve the equation, you get a z equals e to the minus aT, correct. If this a is positive, if a is positive, then this will converge. Because e to the minus aT. Then this magnitude will be less than one. If a is negative, for example, negative one, you get the e of T. If that is negative, then this magnitude will be bigger than one. It will diverge. That is, if a is negative one, that means this is just e to the negative negative one t, which is e to the t. Definitely this will diverge. In this case, if this a is, for example, negative one, that will give e to the negative negative one, which is e to the t. The magnitude will be bigger than one. In this case, the condition of final value theorem is not satisfied. Even though you can apply this theorem to calculate the right side, but you get the wrong answer. For example, you can multiply one minus z inverse and do a calculation, you get zero, when z tends to one. But you get the wrong answer, if a is negative, for example, negative one.

This is one case. Second case, you have oscillatory sequence. For example, sine omega t. Just now, we have the sine omega t found in our calculation, like this. This is the sine omega t z transform. If you compute the pole, by solving the equation with the denominator zero, you found, you have two complex poles on the unit circle. In this case, the condition is not satisfied. Remember, this is the condition. All poles must be inside with one exception at z equals one. If we have two complex poles on the unit circle, that's not the exception. Why do we have the exception? This is because when you have a simple pole like this. What's the pole of this? z equals one. It is a simple pole. Simple pole means the order here is one. Then this is the inverse of that. That is corresponding to unit step function. This has a limit, which is one. You see as k go to infinity, the limit of this function is one. This function. This is exception. However, if we have a second order pole like this, this is second order, because you have square here. Then your final value theorem cannot be applied because that's not a simple pole. This is allowed. This is not allowed, and actually, this is also not allowed. This third order pole here. When you apply the final value theorem, you have to ensure the conditions satisfied. But in our control system design, we need to ensure stability. Means your system shouldn't diverge. But in some case, you may have marginally stable, which create oscillation. In that case, you also cannot apply this theorem because you don't have a limit for the oscillatory case. We should be careful about the application of the theorem.

Now let's look at some results. For example, for this z transform, we have two poles. If you check, you can do a subtraction, the denominator will be this times this. One pole is at one. That's the simple pole. This met the condition, and for this, the pole is inside unit circle because a is positive, which means, if a bigger than zero, the magnitude of this is less than one. We can apply the theorem. You have two poles, one is inside, and one is at one, which meet the condition. Therefore, you apply the final value theorem to them, x to infinity, you just multiply one minus z inverse with X(z). You get this, you substitute this two here, and then you multiply this in the first term, that gives one, for the second term, you multiply here, then that go to zero. This limit is one. In fact, you can also verify this because this z transform here is obtained from this function. You can say when t go to infinity, or k go to infinity for the sample value, this will go to zero. The limit is one.

This is the summary of property. Some of the property will be given in the final exam and also in the quiz. If properties are not given, they are not required in the exam question. We don't give all of them. We just give some necessary ones. That's the z transform and the properties.

We have inverse transform. Let me formulate the problem. You are given X(z), and you want to find the corresponding time function. That's the problem to be solved, which is the inverse z transform, denoted as Z inverse of X(z). You are given X and you want to find the time domain function x. That's the question to be addressed. As our X(z), it depending on the sample values, with non negative integers. When you consider inverse z transform, you can get x(k). If a T is not given, you can get x(k). Definitely, you cannot get x(t). When you find inverse transform, you can get x(k). If a T is given, you can get x(kT). You cannot get x(t). I mean, x, the continuous function. In fact, there are many x(t) that can match your x(k) or x(kT). For example, in this diagram, we have x(kT) given as this points. The corresponding x(t) can be a unit step function, or can be a function like this, as long as this curve across the sample values. It's impossible to get x(t). But you can get x(k) or x(kT). To find the inverse z transform is basically to find x(k) or x(kT) from the given X(z). We have four approaches to do inverse transform. One is called direct division. Second method is called computational methods. Third method is called partial fraction expansion method, and finally, inverse integral methods. We come back next week to study this four methods. We stop here today.
