Okay. Welcome, and thank you for coming this evening. Right? I'm this is my name. I'm taking over the second part of this module. P the first part, I will do this second part, and then Pen will come back for the third part, right? I have been teaching this course for many, many years. So over the years, I have seen or, you know, different patches of students from different countries. Right. And I believe many of you are also in your first semester in NTU, right? So I hope you get used to the system, right in here, especially the exam system and logistic administration. But if you have any query, do not hesitate to reach out to our school Triple E. They have a MSC, right? Management team there, administration team there, right? They will be happy to help you out. Okay? For those who are not familiar with the system, especially those. Now, for I've been given 15 hours to cover these two main topics. All right? Five lectures. This is lecture one. Each of them is 3 hours, right? And actually is less than 15 hours because we had to take some time off for the quiz, right? So in my lecture, after my lecture, I will give time for anyone who may have questions, right? Or perhaps sometimes you may need to digest the material, or you can ask me the following week, right? It is better for you, right? If you had doubts, clarify with you, you know, face to face, because this topic right as you will see later, it is involved equations, right? Equations and system, right? So it is easier for you I have query, right? We can clarify that face to face. No, sometime if I reply you e mail, right it's typical to type equations, right? Or I may not get fully understand your query, and then you don't understand my reply, so things like this. However, however, if if it is possible for a quick reply to e mail, right? We do that. Or sometimes we we may do this via teams, discussion over teams, right? Online. Okay? As I mentioned, there will be a quiz and actually, I have also announced earlier on. It's going to be on 5 October. Es actually during lecture fourth. They will take some time there in that schedule period. 830 to 915. And over here, I will give more details later. But essentially, it will covers my my past only. Today's lecture, next week lecture, and one more week, right? Lecture three. And then you will have your recess break, one week break. After the recise break, you'll come back for lecture four, and we have some lecture first, and then we have the quiz. It is is is 15% 15. All of the overall 40% of the CA. The exam will constitute 60%. I'll give you more details later. This is only on my part. Prof part he will take care. Okay? Okay. That's for the quiz. Now, state based models, analysis and design, right? As fine application in many areas, industrial applications, in chemical engineering, process engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, right? In many areas, right? In control system, our system, right, ever since the concept of state variable was first opposed by Offess Carman, right? So years ago. So over the years, there are numerous books written on this topic on stage based modeling or discrete time control system or digital control system. Right? Listed here are some books which I find pretty good. For example, the first one, digital control system by Benjamin Ker. So here are the earlier edition. Now there are new revised edition, in which you can check on the library or online, right? So this is a pretty good book as reference or textbook used in a number of overseas universities also on the topic of digital control system. Okay. Computer control system by Karl strom C theory and Design. All right. Mostly emphasizing on the implementation of the implementation issues of digital control system. Right? And this book here by Digital Control System Analysis and Design by Charles, and Nagel is quite the easy book to read. The library has copies. All right on this topic. There a lot of examples there. And also at the end of the chapter, a lot of questions also for you to refer and practice as you want. Okay. Another book by digital Control System by Franklin Power, workman. This book is if you're reading it, the authors would very often assume that the reader will have a background on control system undergraduate. Undergraduate calls on control system ginery. Okay? And this last one here is for your information only because the emphasis is on implementation and various design methods. For your info. Of course, as I mentioned, there are many other books which you can find in a library. Okay. So those are the reference. Which you may use. Now we will go on to start our discussion on space space modeling and design. We will have four lectures on this. Four lectures. And the last lecture five will be on linear optimal control, which I'll talk more about it in e f. Four lectures on the stat space modeling analysis and design. I will go through from the fundamentals, the motivation, all right, analysis, properties of the stage space model, and moving on to controller and observer design. Okay? Four lectures on this. All right. Okay. Se figure one, huh? This is one possible configuration of a digital control system, right? The plan that you wanted to control a process that you wanted to control, in generate term in engineering, you call it a plan. It can have a model is this space also like this. It is continuous time system, St that this is S dot means the dx by dt is Ax plus y cx plus U. A discuss more about this later on. The plan that you want to control right and the objective is to design an algorithm. Control algorithm, a controller. All right. And to implement this controller, all right, via maybe a dedicated PC, right? So that it produces a sequence sequence U K t sequence. You write the intend here, the next intend, next instant, et cetera sequence correct. To produce the sequence here, equate the control sequence. And then you apply it to the plant. The plant is continuous time analog. So we need a DAC there, a digital analog converter. You apply to the plant. So that the plant will behave in this coast manner, will behave according to your design specification. Okay to design the control low Okay So that the plant will behave in accordance to your design specification. And the specification, typically, there are two part. Okay? To parts. The first part is on the State state park, right? The State state park. And then the other part is a transient par, right? The statistic part or statistic specification could be designed a controller such that the output will follow your reference input as time goes to infinity. Right? They call it tracking accuracy, the sty state part, right? Stay state tracking. You want the output to follow the input RT here as t goes to infinity, right? The other part is the transient part. All right. The transient part is whereby you apply a unit step input, and you want the output or the system itself to behave in accordance to some specification here, right? The specification. R time, overshoot and sapling, right? The rice time. The time it takes or the response to go 0-100%. Maybe you specify this sex here. So many seconds or milliseconds, right? The right time. Overshoot is this part here, how much overshoot, Here you allow or the system. Ba sometimes, how much this is determined by the the devisers down the line. They may not be able to accept too high and input, right? So you design the controller right to give some constraint overshoot. Settling time, settling time is the time it takes the response to settle down sudden given tolerance. And this tolerance can be 2% or 5%. The response will go there and then they will settle down. How long it takes the response to settle down to the given torance, and that is a settling time. Right? So Transcend accuracy is usually specified in terms of in terms of these three characteristics, right? Or time domain specs, see? They are in the time domain man second second, right? And they are related to the cross pole location. All right? They are related to the closed loop pole location. So you design the controller so that the crossed loop poles are at certain location, all right? And this location is related to all the specification. They can be shot. So these are se typical specs. And the typ one here, Control effort required. They may be asked to desire a controller, subjected to some constraint, such as on the control effort. The maximum magnitude of UK t, the summation of this is equate the energy. This topic is related to what we're going to talk about in lecture five or linear optimal control, right when they come to lecture five and we talk more about this. They design this controller subjected to some constraints, right? So that is an example of the design of the control digital control system, check this. The design approaches. The design approaches the various approach. The frequency approach, Ros is the first part of this course, a classical approach, and we will spend four lectures on using the stage based approach. All right, using the stage based approach. Discrete time space space portal. They are actually better adapted than a lot. For real time control system implemented with a computer. Because when you implement the computer, you're sampling the signal, you know, at a K instant, k plus one instant, k plus two instant, et c. It is convenient for computer application is one of the advantages. Sg space also allow you can represent a model, it can be a plan, a process. This model can have many inputs and many outputs. You can have a stage space model for this particular process, having multiple input, multiple output. We call it multivariable system. Besides, representing single input, single output system. The one input, one output, the cord single input, single output. State space model can also be applied. Not only to linear system. In this course, we will focus on linear system, but it can also be applied to nonnea and time variance system. Each of this actually is another subject itself. Another subject itself, advanced control stuff. Some of you may be involve in control research. Non linear system control. I veran system control. This point of information. Okay. Now we go on now to the motivation. The motivation of this state based or state variable modeling, beyond that analysis and design. As we are from the school of electrical electronic engineering. So many of my examples are electrical in nature. Although, as I mentioned, state space can be applied to mechanical, chemical, et cetera engineering, right? So many of my examples are very simple electrical system, so that we can understand we can look at the various concept of state space within this using this simple circuit. All right. We look at RLC circuit like this, RLC, RLC, a series circuit. A series circuit, and the capacitor will have its initial voltage. So we start from the initial time is t zero, t not zero initial time. If we look at the to votage law, around this loop here. You have this equation. The equation across the inductor here is LD IDT, and the voltage across the resistor by ms I R, and this is the voltage across the capacitor. We call this L, the current to the inductor. L. If you differentiate throughout respect to time, then you get this second order differential equation. The second order differential equation in. The solution of this equation is L. And what about VC. In this circ. Yeah. In this circ, the energy related to the electric field and the magnetic field. Energy are store there. In the basic electrical circuit analysis that revising this. The energy store in the electric field is proportional to the tag across the capacitor square, and the energy store in the the magnetic field is proportional to I squared. So in this circuit, the two variables of interest will be the VC and I L. Because if you just solve this equation, you need no IL. What about VC? It's tedious, very tedious to time consuming to find other solution. We identify identify the variables of interest in the particular circuit. This example is VC and IL. Then from there, we try to form some equation. What's the next step? After we have identified the variable of interest, which is D C and IL, what do we do? We then form a vector. A a vector required X vector. So this vector will consist of the variable of interest. You can put VC here, IL, or you can put L here and VC here. Okay? So that is the x t of vector. Thereafter, we want to find x dot. The dot here refers to the d by d t. The first order derivative with respect to time of each individual variable here. For example, X will be this term will be PC dot, this term will be L dot. Okay. So we have your x t, and then you have your Xt. Then from there, we will go and try from the circuit or from the system given and fine equation relating this term respect to this, and this term respect to this in this example. So we go and do that. All right. So this L is a current through the inductor. There's also the current through the capas, the charging current or capasor, is given by this equation, C dV C dt. This is the C dV dt. This term is C dot. From this equation, you will have BC dot is divided throughout by C, is on over C L. So you have one equation that. We have one equation that. The next equation is L dot, you'll find. IL dot is over here. The VL is L di dt. You bring this two term over the other side, and then you have divide by L, you have the equation of L dot. From here, you bring this two term over the other side. I do. That equation one and two, The two equation there, then the right in this form. In terms of the x t over here, the left hand side is at top. You combat them in what we call here, the matrix form. First order matrix differential equation for this example, in the matrix vector form. You look at the first equation, On the left is this, you multiply a matrix by this vector, this times this, and you have this. The second term or second equation here on the left is this on the right is this times this, and you recover this. So looking at this example, you can envisage that in this topic of state variable analysis, all right, we have to use matrix algebra, okay to solve problems. Okay All right Matrix algebra. I will talk more about this as we go along. This is an example of S space model. We haven't talked about S variable. We'll come back to this example. Now, next we review, continuo S space representation. Because the plan that we're controlling, as I mentioned earlier, continuous time, can be continuous time, usually. And it can have a s space model also. When we do the design in discrete time, we have to find the discrete time equivalent sp space model of this continuous time, space model. Shown here is linear time invariant, LTI, linear time invariant, MO, multiple input, multiple output. So here, they got R number of input, n number of outputs. IO continue was time system. In this system, they are n number of state variables. What are state variable and what the stat place model? The state based model of a system is the mathematical description model is a mathematical description, of course, of the system in terms of a minimum set of internal variables. For this system, you choose your variable of interest to you, internal variables, x one to x n. Together with the knowledge of those variable at the initial time t nom. So those variable, what are the values at the initial time t nom? You're going to start let's say analyze a system from the initial time t naught and then towards infinity. So what are the values of these variables at the beginning time. And together with the system input, because you're applying a system input, apply the system input initial time to infinity. Then it is sufficient to determine the future state and output. The state s based model is that minimal set x one to n of internal variables. The knowledge of their initial time values together with the application of the inputs from the initial time to infinity is the sufficient or sufficient to predict the future system states. And the output. A continuous time system can be modeled using this by a set of differential equation, call state equation, a set of differential equation, first order. Important thing is a first order. A set of first order differential equation, Let me call that state equation. And together with the upput equation, the upput equation. So they are they call that the state space model. So this is the state equation. This is the output equation. So this is the generic definition of a state space model. Now, let me use the previous example and illustrate this Cs. In the previous example, right. We identify the VC voltage across the capacitor. And the current to the inductor in the LC cc. They are variables of interest to you, related to the energy store in the electric field and magnetic field. Those are the the state or state variable. These two state variable or sometimes it just called states. So you put them in vector form like this. We call it got a state vector. This is a stick vector. For that example. Then we go on to find the VCL finally, get the two equation and we got this the first order matrix differential equation, right? Of the RLC circuit. This is your S stop is A x. In this state equation representation. In this case here, the u is zero. There's no B U term here. We call this the homogeneous equation, homogeneous equation. Knowledge of those variables at the initial time t nom. So I will refers here to the initial value of C, initial value of L. So those are the initial state for this example. All right. So Knowledge of this initial state. Then if you solve this equation, you can get an expression of pattern, expression of VC IL, we will look at example literal. In other words, you can know the time response of the state variable. That's the very simple example to introduce you to the concept of state variables. So let me give you some more examples. All right? Suppose you have this, huh? That was a series circ, right? So now we have a parle circ. RLC. Again, the variable of interest, the current through the inductor is over here, right. Maybe you call it state variable here. The vtae across a capacitor is the other stat variable. In this example, or you can call this X one and this x2o. Stick variable modeling is not unique. We will talk more about this dt also. Right? And as for the output, if you are let's say interested in this current the inductor, you may choose it to be your output variable y, right? Or you want to choose it to be here, depending on the requirement, right? Another example, RC. There's only one energy storage element here. The only variable state variable will be the voltage across the capacitor, this is a X. You may choose this votage to be your Apu variable. Then you get the put equation. Let's look at an example. So here, you have a capacor there. Another one here, and the inductor there. You can choose the current, the inductor. This one here, you may choose to be x one, what is across here is x two. What is across a capacitor. And what about this one? You want to cod here X three? What is across this capacitor. The state space model is a mathematical description of the system in terms of a minimum set of internal variables, right? This example here, we know that X two and X three are the same, the in para two elements. You don't need to choose this. If you choose too many variables to represent a system, x one to x ten, for example, so it's a higher order system. Some system can go to 200 depend. When you design the controller, it will also be a high order controller, and the implementation cost, of course, will be i than one which is a lower. Okay? So So now, we look at examples, This is what we call a rock digram representation of let's say a system, right? The continuous time system. The input is U, and output is y. You can represent this continuous time system by a few ways. One is differential equation. Differential equation. For example, this famous Newton slow, force equal to mass multiply by acceleration. Your X is the displacement. Me DS by dt velocity, you differentiate more time, we get the acceleration, That's the Newtons right All of us know, right? Familiar. So the state variable we choose will be the X t and S port t. The displacement is related to the displacement, right, potential energy, and then you have kinetic energy in velocity. Okay? So S one is X t, S two is S pot. So this is the choice of the state variable for this F equals to masa acceleration. After you have identified or given the state variable, then we need to go and find the state equation, the individual first order differential equation of each respective state variable, X one dog, S one dot, it will be S dot, which is X two, you have this equation there. A. Then the next equation, the S two dot, would be per dog, right over here, will be F over, right? So you have that as your second state equation. W are first order differential equation, If the output is x one, that is the displacement you're interested in, That's the output, then the stick based model would be given by this. You will to rewrite this into this metric vector. In terms of the stick vector, For example, the first equation, x one dog. This time this gives you this first one p zero, S two dog, this time this gives you this. This is your input? The applied false. Y is x one? You C matrix will be rather a row vector. You must know how to write from this individual state equation into this first order matrix, differential equation. From there, the state equation, put equation, S Ax p u y cx? So another example, a more general case, you looking at let's say D this differential equation. U t is the input, and Y t is the output. Okay? And then your suppose is given that the first state variable is, and the second stat variable is D Y d t. So these are the state variable chosen for this system. We want to obtain a stat spas model. A State spas model. U is the input. Why is the output? We need to find x one dot and S two dot, right? Okay. Now look at here, S one dot, is y dot which is equals to s2s1 dog is y dog equals to x two. Right? Now we want to find x two dot is d square y d d squa from this equation here, F here, over here, you can see that it is half minus five? This is from here. We know that y is x one. This is x one. This is minus 52x1. So you have the two state equation. Okay? Now, we will write this in terms of the first or matrix differential form. On the left hand side will be your S. You can include the time variable yourself. Maybe a puta BUT, Yt D t, right? So we have the two state equation here and here. The first one S one dot is x two. So here will be this equation here. Zero, and then Should be here. This time d or give d one, right? And what about here? That gives us equation one. You have to try to refresh your matrix algebra. The second equation here, you can see. What about this r B. All right. And over here. K A one, zero, here, four, that is a state equation. And the output, the output. X1t, B, one, zero and zero. This is A, B, C D, matrices. These are very simple example. I'm not giving you completed examples. Very simple example to illustrate. The formation or development of stage space model, from the differential equation. F differential equation, we can have stage space model to represent a system, We can have differential equation and we can have stat space models. This is only a single differential equation. Some system they consists of more than one, differential equation. The describe the system. In a similar way, you identify or given the s variables, obtain the differential equations as respective state variable, and then put them into the matrix. This. Okay. Now, there is another way to represent a continuous time system. There are another way and we call it the transfer function. Taking the Laplace transform of Y t Y S, T S and the ratio of the output over the input. In the S domain, we have what we call the transport function. Or sometimes we call it the input output approach. The input output approach. We can have three different methods to represent the same system. The same system. From the differential equation, we can formulate the state space model. I give you examples. From the State space model, you have x t equals to Ax plus U Y CS plus du. Can we obtain the trans function from the S space model. That's what we're going to do. Transfer function from the St space model. Right? This is a s based model of the system in general, we had to use La Plus transform in the S domain continuous time system. Da Plus transform both side with the initial state as zero transfer function definition, we assume zero initial condition. The left hand side is this one here, the right hand side is this where x x is the pros transform of x t and US is a laps transform of T. A. Then we group the SS term together on the left hand side, right hand side or goal this term. And then we pre multiply both sides by the inverse of this, and we have 1.3. A. Then you do the a plus transform or the output, y S is cx plus du S. X S, you substitute this demins here, and then you get this expression. And the ratio of output over input in the S domain is this 1.5 expression. O. In terms of the they call it the system matrices, ABCD. So this is a transfer function. So you're given the based model. Find the transfer function. Then we do this. Now, this is the verse of a matrix elements are functions of the S part and better. Example, Example, this S minus A can be this. The verse of a matrix where the elements here are function of S, is the join over the determinant is the join divided by the determinant. If this is that There are some matrix result, useful for this course, I put it in Tn. You can have a look, the determinant of a matrix, finding the universe of a matrix for this co. For example, if A is this, then the inverse the inverse of this, this is SI minus A, and then inverse. Inverse. Now, this is a join divided by the join determinant. The determinant is just this dumb this dumb, right? Now for two by two matrix. The joy is just simply stop the diagonal elements. And then the remaining element, you put a minus sign over there. So this is the verse. Rather than the transpose of the co factors for higher dimension matrices. Okay. Stop the dig elements and put a minus side over the repeating elements. Test the joy, the determinant dtm dist this. Do you get that. You have this tin. All right? We have more examples on, don't worry. Now, if you look at the denominator of the transport function is the polynomial is determinal of SI minus A. Determine minus A. The denominator. Or transfer function, you have notions of pose and zeros. The denominator polynomial will be a pose polynomial. This will be a pose polynomial. In this case is the eigen values. They are the eigen values. B matrix algebra, for certain eigen value of the matrix A, the associated eigen vector, satisfy this equation that So the non trial solution determinant of this equals to zero to solve for the eigen values of the matrix A. So you said the denominator equals to zero. They are the pose of the system. When you look at the eigen values of the matrix A in the stag space modeling, S A plus V, they are identical to the eigen values. Of the matrix A with the pose of the system. Okay? Maybe I finish this example. Let me have a break. Now, this is another example on modeling of a system. In this case, server motor system right to obtain a stage s based model. All right. Server motor or servos. Sometimes they call servos. They are electronic devices together with actuators, you know, can be linear or rotary. All right. The function is to give precise rotary or linear motion, right? For example, in the antenna tracking system. Craft, antenna tracking system. V. Excuse me. This is the schematic of a servo motor. In fact, it's just this is the separately cited DC motor driving a mechanical load. This is the amateur circuit, and this is a few circuit. You can see the fw circuit represented by this here f circit. The amateur circuit represented by RA resistance of the amateur windings and the LA inductance, right? So the f circuit show here is connected to a spate DC source. So it is called the Separately excited DC motor. The field environment is produced by this field circuit. And the motel will rotate in this field environment, there will be induced motage, we call it the Ba EM represented by this Ba EM in the motel. All right. And it is proportional to the angular velocity of the moto. And this is your EA map constant, this is the EM map equation right over here. The top. The top developed. This is related to DC motor system. I won't to ask you, don't worry, but just to explain to you, for those who are not familiar with DC motor. The top produce is proportional to the amateur current, which is this current, and this is the top constant. The top produce is to overcome this mechanical load. The J and the B, the moment initial and the viscal sion via this equation. This is like Newton's law, right? This is like a Newton's second law, this for rotation. Okay. So you have two equation already BM constant. M 1.7 and the top equation. And the other equation here is the KVL, the amature k. Apply vote this plus this, beta this as nec the LA, so you have 1.9. So after this three equation, then this equation, they are the differential equation representing this subvert system. Now we want to form a state space model. All right. And the state equation, That's now four equal to M acceleration example, that one be have linear displacement. Here is beta angular displacement and the angular velocity. X one, X two, one, X two, you have you have defined for at variables. Then the next step is to find state variables. State equations, x1.s2 dot. These are the state variables. X one dot is this guy that, S one dot is equals to x two. S two dot is square b d square because you differentiate this one more time. S two. This term here, as I said, here, you use this three equation, and you will get this expression. Let me just show you for the benefit of some student. So we have 1.8. This term. This term is this p here by g. Then I here, 1.9, p 1.9 is E -1.9. Then this term, en 1.7, 1.7, right? This term is X two, right? When you simplify, you'll get to here. After that, you're going to put or write the state equation in your matrix for in terms of the 12. X1s2, S one is beta, S one do is x two. This time this gives you the first equation, and the second equation, S two dog, this term, this time this plus this. Your E is your input. Y is x one. If you choose y to be x one, the A t, then your C matrix. You plain A, B, C. Then from here, you get the transfer function, CSI minus A in us B, first, you form SI minus A. SI minus A. S I minus A, will be S is the identity matrix because A is two by two. If A is three by three, it is or three, minus A. You have ss00 minus one, and then S plus d. This is SI minus A I. Okay. You find the inverse. You find the inverse, you try. The determinant is this this minus d is zero multiplied by the join. This is just how I show you example, you stop the diagonal elements and then put a minus sign of the remaining elements. You found SI minus A inverse. After that, you post multiply b, and then pre multiply C by C, you t and you get this. You get the transfer function. So this is this example, we show you the developments, obtaining the differential equation that describe the system, and from the differential equation, we obtain the stat space model, and from the stat space model, we obtain the transfer function, all the three aspects that we have discussed, illustrated using this example. Let's have a break. Usually, how long you take have the break. 15 minutes, 20 minutes. Yeah. So let's break. 20 minutes. Usually, after 1 hour, we have 10 minutes, another hour, another 10 minutes. All right. But too many breaks also So we have one break. After the break you come back, and then I start to finish my discussion, and then you can go back and rest. How about that? All right. So maybe some of you haven't take dinner, right? So we have another break, maybe 15, 20 minutes. We have a break now? 15, 20 minutes. Okay. Shall we start? Okay. Okay. We have discussed the representing a system via to differential equations, and then from there or represented it with a state based model, or input output transfer function, right? So we obtain the state equation of the system. List variable can be for example in our RLC circuit. It can be voted across a capacitor or current through the inductor. They are internal variables of the system. If we solve this equation, then we get an expression of x t, an expression of VCT, and the expression of ILT in our RLC example. That's what we're going to do. You have a time function of the state variable, then you get to know, what's the value of those state variables, at a certain time t. We do use a plus transform of this left hand side, you have this, and right hand side, you have that. Then you group the x term together, this x zero, the initial state vector can be Example, c zero IL zero of vector. Then 1.14 gives you the x x. If you do a inverse plus transform of this, then the left hand side will be your x t, your stick vector in time function, consisting of two parts, and both parts are represented with respect to matrix here, V t. This matrix here, is non singular and means invertible. A, is a non singular matrix. It is called the state transition matrix, A, the state transition matrix. And how do you get it? It is first, you obtain SI minus A, then you find the inverse and then do a inverse laplace transform of that. You find SI minus A, find this inverse, and every elements in the matrix there, you do a inverse plus transform, and that is your state transition matrix over here, and it is actually an exponential matrix, e e. So it is the solution of d, expressed in terms of the initial state, And also the input U. The X d is a function of the initial state two terms due to the initial state multiplied by the state transition matrix and the input given. The second term here, let's call it gama this definitely integral here is ama t which is the integration of this term, if you want. Or if you like, you do the inverse laplace transform of this term here, which is given by SI mis inverse B, multiply by the laplace transform of UT. The input UT, right? If it's a unit step function, then Laplace transform of unit step is one S. If you'd like to do integration, you can do integration to get the second term. If you want, you can do the inverse Laplace transform approach, and you get a t. Okay? Some of the properties of the state tradition matrix. They are listed here. For example, the value of the state tradition matrix when t is zero is the identity matrix. There are some other properties which usually if you are in control research, sometimes, you need to prove certain theorem, or you may also see in some books. They're trying to prove certain theorem and the All right depends on some of these properties. This is for the information here. Okay. So this is the solution, right? When the initial time t is equals to zero, start from zero, okay? If you don't start from zero, but at some value, t greater than zero, I will substitute t equals to t nought here, salt for zero, and then re substitute back into here, and this is your x t when the starting time is t greater than zero. It is called the state transition equation. The state transition equation is just the solution x, as shown here. Let me summarize this result here, which we will use quite often. You had the system represented by a state equation. And then you want to solve for the stick vector, right? Okay. You solve for the stick vector. That gives you a time function of the stick variables, right? In your put equation, After you solve this equation, the t, you substitute into the output equation. And then you get a time expression of Y t. You know, you know the behavior of the put variables, you know, S t goes to infinity, right? So you know X t, then you get to know Y t, which is the output variable. The solution of S t is given by The state tradeso matrix is, you must find this matrix first, D A, and then you find the inverse a joy determinant, and then inverse transform. A. The next example, 1.3 is to illustrate this. Determine the output response, it means y t, when the system here is subjected to a unit step input, Unit step, it means from t less than 00, zero is one. Unite. This a time function expression. Initial state is given by this is a vector, one minus one. That's your initial state. This is the system A B C given. You need to find the state traditional matrix first. You need to find SI minus A first, this is A. Okay. S minus a is S i minus a. Then you get what s00s minus minus plus two S, the 10 minus one minus one minus one. The pattern that the matrix of this S i minus A inverse. Is the determinant this tums in the denominator, and the adjoin, the stop the diagonal elements and put a minus sign over the revealing elements. This are S i minus A inverse. A S minus A. Every term there, you divide by the determinant and you have this. The next step is to find the inverse laplace transform. Then we look up the table, right? This table, I also uploaded in NTU len, is the same table you will get for your quiz and the exam. Meaning the terms there are stated, by this. You look up the table, for example, one S S plus A, item eight, item eight, The verse plus transform, and then you get diste that one to y s plus two is correspondingly, you get e minus two t. That. After you get the state traditional matrix. Then the second term here. You can do integration, as I said earlier, or you can do the inverse plus transform method of this kind. Let me show you. You have SI minus A inverse B S, SI minus a inverse every come there. We reproduce here. And then your B is over here. Now, US, US is the plus transform of the input UT, which is a unit step function. The transform will be one S or unit step. US is one S. Then you get multiply, Yeah. If I make mistake, please let me know, make mistake. Then you look up the table. Now this term is item number 13 over here. For this term. You find the corresponding A, etc, and you find the verse transform of this term and you get ga. Okay? So you will have your ex t, equals to this d plus t, the st trans matric you will obtain. The initial state is over here. You put here, you multiply out. This is your state vector. You try. Practice, verify this expression. As for the output, as I mentioned earlier, on you have solve x t, you substitute into the output equation, you get the Put variable. In this example, our output equation, y is just c x t, so your x t is equals to this, then pri multiply by c, you get this. O the system, we solve for the state equation, and then we get your output equation, output variable equation. Now, this is the table that will be provided. You can see they are 28 function, some of that you don't use. In the transform pair between time domain and do the transform. Okay. It's not possible to in all the possible function that you may encounter in practice, correct. No possible, right? So sometimes some function that you get that you have to do some manipulation so that you get into this standard form and you can refer for the transform pad, So I'll show you a couple of them, a. So example this. All right. So you don't see such terms over here. Column here. You don't see them. Okay. So what you can do is the denominator, you can first do completing the square if you can do it, is this, right? And the numerator, you can also do some trick there. One of the ways this there are other ways. Then one over s plus one plus one over the left hand side equals to the right hand side. And then these are your standard term that you can refer to the table, follow. Another example. Again, this you can find on the transform table. I the, you need to do something. So the denominator, we do some factorization. This basic mathematics, right? Factorization here. Then you do some trick era can be then you get. These are in the transform table, which you can look at. Right? Okay? For some of you may be familiar with partial fraction expansion. Go ahead, right? Go ahead, you get the same answer, okay? Those who are familiar with partial fraction expansion. I'll just show you some examples. The key point is, you don't get all the function that listed here. You have to do some completing the square factorizing partial fraction expansion, right? Example. Okay. So that's all I want to talk about the continuous time system. Review of the continuous time, space modeling, from differential equation to stat space model transfer function to the solution of the state vector to get the variable, right? Okay. Now, what is the discrete time state space model the sample and whole? The process you're controlling is continuous time, have a space model equals Ax plus c plus. Then you sample it with a zero or. Okay? To sat down. Okay. The aim now is to obtain the discrete state equation from the continuous time state equation. That means to discretize the given continuous time system, to find the zero or the whole equivalent. To find the discrete time equivalent s space model of the continuous time space mod. All right. The continuous time state equation. B is Stop is AS plus U, and this is the solution, the state transition equation we have er on obtained, using a plus verse la plus transform. We are sampling the leave it a zero or the hole, your U K or your U T is constant between sampling instant. You can to sample the value, eve it constant, and the next sample sample again. Between sampling instant, it is constant. So it is constant. You can bring it out of the integrand like this, right? Bring it out. This v between sampling instant, right? So we start K T as the initial time is KT by this. To is KT, To is KT, then you have this equation. The one in bracket let's call it with another term. D t. Then you have 2.6, which describes the value of x t at times between k, in bring in s k t and k plus one t. M here, one between k and k plus one t. If we set t is k plus one t, t become k plus one t, then You get this 2.7. You get 2.7. Where this term here is just your state transition matrix, you evaluate the time t variable equals to the spring period t. This term here is this. As for the second term, this term there, it is equals to this. If you do a change of variables, a change of variables, the second term is given by this definite integral. What we see there here now is this expression is a first order difference equation, which is the discrete state equation of the discrete time system. To term there, the first term, t is a state transition matrix, evaluate at t equals to the sep period t, and the second term there is this definite integral. And the Put equation is replaced with KT. Commercial, we usually drop and from the expression, and then we get the zero or the whole equivalent. Let me summarize for you the result. So you have a continuous time system. Then a top. What is the zero order whole equivalent of this continuous time system? Meaning you sampling this system with a zero order hole. Or what is the equivalent discrete time based model? Okay. So the discrete system So it'll be x k plus one. Here, I I will use a AD. The discretize system A matrix. If you want, you can use this matrix. Up to. Is the A matrix of the discrete i system. And then the Y K, you got the C, this is respect to the discrete i system, your AD, the A matrix of the discrete i system, is the state transition matrix, let t equals to the sampling period t. I example. This state transition matrix, as you know, you're going to do a inverse lapros transform of this matrix, right? The la verse lala transform of that matrix. Okay? Now, the B matrix of the disputi system, which is. So you do this definitely integral. And the C matrix is the same as the continuous time system. These are the equation that you need in order to solve in order to find the equivalent discrete time space model. Let's look at example. In the server motor system. So this is the stage spas model of the server motor continuous time system. We want to sample this with a zero order hole, the sampling period t is 0.1 second. Okay? So this or ABC of the continuous time system. Right? First thing we do is to find the state transition matrix. You must practice now, go through this yourself again when you go home, work it out. S minus A. What is A, A is this. S, this minus a. These matrix, you'll find the universe joy over determinant. I went to a few examples just now, right. This is your SI minus A inverse. Then you find the inverse Laplace transform of every term there. You find Vt, the state transition matrix, every term. This term is one, this term is e minus t, this term is this. Look up the table. If you don't have the function in the table, you do some manipulation. All right. Then the sampling period t is 0.1. So we will set this capital t to 0.1, and use your calculator and give the numerical value. You don't stop there. Don't stop at e p -0.1 give the numerical value. Final value. That is the A matrix of the discreti system. A matrix. This AD. The B matrix of the discrete i system, you do a definite integra. All right. Do this definite integra. And I show you I have uploaded this and then you learn. This is a state transition matrix. Evaluate with respect to some variable, let's call it Tw. This is over here. If you want, you can do the integration or then first, because this is a constant. You can bring in here, multiply, and then just do two integration two entries, U to you. Integrating exponential term example, you know, f refresh, mathematics. B Ax respect to x is about A X by A Integrate every term respect to tow. Then evaluate the limit from zero to t to t, which is 0.1, and then find the final answer. Give the final answer and then that's what you get. So you get your B and your C is the same as C matrix of of the Continuous time cout equation. All right? So this is the discretizing the continuous time system with a ss based model, temporary with a zero or the hole, and then we do this to get the ABCD matrices for the discrete system. So just like the continuous time system, from the state space model, we can get the transfer function, C minus C S minus A inverse plus D, right? Discrete time case, similarly, we can also obtain the transfer function from the state space model. We here is discrete time. We use that transform. Z transform now, not the S or plus transform. Zero initial condition. So take the z transform of this equation, left hand side, right hand side, and then group the x term together pre multiplied by the inverse of this. This is similar to what we did before. For the continuous time case, after you get substitute into y z, and then you get Y Z over U Z Similarly, is two C, here is I, I miel averse b plus d. ABCD are your system mattresses of the discrete time state space model. This inverse again is a join over determinant. Okay? So you have a stat space model, discrete time. A is a transfer function. I put over input. C A must be plus t. Very simple. Remember. You practice a couple of them. You get a equation now. Okay. Now, we go further beyond this. We have let me get some paper. Okay. So you have a bro I get representation. So now, the qui time case. Let's get bigger one. This time case, input will be K, output is y k, right? Then respect to this system is the stick variable or the stick vector x x one, x 2s3sy, example? Then they have their own system mattresses. I put ABCD. This is means that x k plus one is Ax K plus K. You look at it in the context. Early on, we use AD BD, because we're trying to find, you know, discrete t d space model for the continverse time system. This is your ABCD matrices for the discrete time space model. Look at it from the context. All right. Now we have just went tough this input. You see the I Minus am was b plus d. This transfer function, or as I said, is an input output representation of the system. A transfer function, you have pos and zeros notions. Transfer function, talk about transfer function, you're talking about pose and zeros and all the stuff, right? So how do you get the pose or how do you get the zeros from the system matrisss? The pose zeros from the ABCD matrices. The pose, it is similar to what we have discussed just now for the continuous time case. They are identical to the eigen values of the matrix A. That's because the de terminal of I minus A is in the denominator now. This is a pole portinomal. In the denominator pole Potnomal. The pose of the transfer function is identical to the eigen values of the matrix A. In a similar way as the converse time case. Now what about zeros from the ABC matrices. A system zero is a value of particular no? Such that the system output is zero, even with a non zero state and input combination. What it means? Even when the state and the input are not zero, and some particular z. Output is zero. The note, is a zero of the system. Putting mathematically the meaning of this. In your state equation, you take that transform again over here. All right. This bring all the other side, right hand side is zero, and the output equation is Cs plus d u, the system output is zero is zero, and the particular z equals to zero state and u. Output is zero. With this two equation, you compare them in this form. For example, this tums gives you the equation one. This tums gives you the second equation. At a certain z naught, the output is zero for non zero state and u. The condition for the assistance of a non trivial solution is the determinant of this equals to zero. That will give you if you solve this, the roots of this equation will be the zero the transfer function. Here, this is a articial matrix. Over here is I minus A, and then minus B C and D. You form this matrix, define is de cominan, and then that is the polynom zero polynomial. Hey. This evening. So you can see that we are slowly getting into heavier mathematics, Matrix algebra. A you are doing is tkpace. We cannot avoid because this is a first order matrix vector form, right solution involve matrix algebra. Let may be design controller, et cetera. I will still be using this basic metrix result. Right. Okay. Let's look at an example to illustrate this. So this is the state equation and output equation of a discrete time system, right? So this is your A, B, C matrix. Okay. All right. So even first to find the transfer function, right? The first find us a inverse. The first form z minus a, I minus this is this matrix here. The verse of this is a joint divided by determinant. The determinant is this minus this this, you simplify this polynomal, and the joint is two by two, you stop the elements here, tag the elements, and then put a minus sign on the remaining elements. That's the joint. I join or two by two. So then you pre multiply this the C matrix and post multiply by B matrix, you simplify. This is your transfer function, right? When you go back, you practice, try to verify yourself. Practice multiply matrices, pre multiply, post multiply, et cetera. Then you get this. This is a transform function. All right. So if you were to form the zero normal or equation like this. A z minus a minus b c, minus a over here. This is minus a over here. Then next two is minus, this will you put minus b here, minus all the entries. You C here over here and the d zero. It's a partition matrix. You don't have to put a total line. I put it there to explain to you, it is a partition matrix. So you're forming a three by three matrix there, right? Three by three. So you find the determinant of this three by three you verify that it is one, right? So you verify what you get in the transport function. And from the A matrix, from the A matrix, determinant of I minus a, determinant of this this, mi du this, which is the denominator. So that's the pole polynomial. Okay. So on the ABC mattresses. You can get the poles and zeros. So more example, more example. More examples. That's now. There is the. Let me represent we mentioned, we have contiguous time system. We can represent it with differential equation, and from there, we can obtain the state space model of this continuous time system from the differential equation. After having defined the state variable. We went to a few examples, remember, the Newton's law and several motor system, F there, we can obtain the transfer function from the state equation. Here, our starting point is transfer function. Transfer function, and we want to obtain a space model. A transfer function. We want to obtain a s space model. As a double integrator. We're given that s11s squared. Simple one. It is a starting point. All right? Okay? A double integrator is a cascading two integrator together. All right. So in Brock diagram form, is this, right? Transfer function from here to here, we want a squared. Where do we assign state variable? They will assign the state variable as the output of the integrator. So they will assign output of this integrator is integrator S two, let's say. Because it's a very convenient way to do this. Because if the output of the integrator is x1t, the input to the integrator will be x one dot t. Go through the integration, remove the differentiation. This is x1t. This is s2t. We define state variables as the output of integrators because it's convenient to do so so we can easily obtain the state equation. Right? So with this, then x one dot is x two right. So one equation, right? O state equation, which is the first order differential equation. Okay. And then what about S two dot? This is a u, right? This is a y. S two dot will be u, and then y is x one. Okay? So the compact then now in matrix vector form to get your ABC matrices. So you have your X one dot, S two dot, S one do is x two plus 1201 and then zero. S two do is 001, y is x1100. So that is stat space model of this double integrator. All right? That is the space model of this double integrator. From here, we want to obtain, we want to discretize this. What do we do? We will do this. We will find the state transition matric. Then you evaluate at the sepal, sep period P, and find this definite integral one by one. You find SI A inverse. Which is this SI minus inverse, Then every term that you inverse laplace transform, and you evaluate t equals to the sembling period t, then you get 101 and a t. That is your A matrix of the disti system. As for the B matrix, you do this definite definite integration, All right. We fe tile 101t. I integrate, very simple. This is just integrating with respect to to, to respect to tow, and one, so you get this. They will evaluate from zero to t. They get that. I will advise you to practice and verify the. Don't just look at the solution, work it out. Then you see the amount of work involved. Some are very simple, some this inv. Okay. So that is your A, B and C matrices. And if you want to find the transfer function in the z domain, C z minus A vers B. So this is the transfer function in terms of the sep period. This example is we start from a transfer function, double integrator, assigned the variable as the output of the integrator, we obtained the step space model of the continuous time system, and then we disktiz it. The next example, you can view yourself just to find the zeros and pose as before from the ABCD matrices. Let's spend more time on this on the state. The solution, so call of the state equation in discrete time domain. Okay? The most straightforward way of solving the state equation is by recursion. What is the value X one, x2s3, x? Okay? So when k equals to zero, the left hand side is one, right hand side is this. X zero here refers to the initial state. Let's say you got two state variable, so your x zero will be x10 s20. If your state vector is ten by one, x one to S ten, so it's ten by one. If it's 50 by one or 50 state variable, then you get 50 by one column vector in the initial state. You move on from K zero equal to zero to one. Left hand side will be X two, right hand side, A S one plus B u one, S one sub between inside here, and then you get this in terms of u zero, u one, s zero, you get X two. Continue unify S three. Life and k equals to two Life and size, x three, right hand side A x two plus u two, et cetera. So you get this. So you P sssively, you do this you will have this expression of X k, the general solution, you apply the input u from zero to k minus one, and you will get the answer, you'll get the value of x k. Again, in terms of two terms, one is due to the input, one is due to the initial state. Due to the initial state, due to the input, combined together in 4.3, you get the state transition equation or the solution of the discrete time system, the state equation. Once in a while, we pause a couple of seconds. Okay? All right. So let's look at numerical example for this. This cost, the lower equation I summarized for you. Then we will look at numerical example. We apply, We are given the discrete time based, the initial state, and U is given by this. UK. Because the initial state is zero, O solution now only has the second term. This one is zero, this is zero. The second term, the uk is equals to one all the time. This is one, le on diste. L diste. So you want to find using this term, you find x one and two. X one is a B, two, you take this submission is AB plus B. After you have found S one, you substitute into your output equation, you can find Y one. After you have found X two, substitute into your output equation, you can find Y two. The state and the output can be obtained successfully. Some of you may not want to remember formula like this. Can be done. Because the formula farting point is the state equation. Remember, is zero, k, one k two, sustively, you get x k, R. X one is B, x1k0 here, x one is A zero plus B zero. S zero is zero, zero is one. This is zero, this one, this equals to b. X one equals to b. This is from the state equation. No need to remember from for this example. Once you find S one, they can substitute into the output equation, they can find y one. Now we move on to x 2s2e here, one plus b, d one. So u one is u one is also one, k is one is also one, u one is one. A 11, x one is b. This A B plus b, this from the state equation, f x one, two, y one, y two, et cetera. Okay okay? Okay. Now, let me share something. Practical reviewer, most of the system that we try to control are continuous time in nature. We have a stat space model, and then we semple it with a zero or the whole to get the discrete time equivalent space model. In practice, some system can be defined by difference equation, or radio. For example, example on, As a process is described by this difference equation. Example, the economy can be modeled, can be modeled in the form of difference equation. From the difference equation, this is what they call difference equation, difference equation. We define the state variable, let's say they define state variable as this s1k, s2k, as this. Then what would be the state space model for this model defined by this difference equation. So what we do, we go on from here, we get x one, k plus one is y k plus one, right? You x1k is y k, s1k plus one is y k plus one. C, right? Then what is y k plus one, is x2k. You got one state equation now. This is a two k. In here, s2k plus one is y k plus two, y k plus two is equals to this. Because of this. From this equation, this is your x2k plus one. So in terms of your state variable, y k is one k, one k, this one is two k, s2k. K p one is s2k. Okay. So now we will put them in your k p one is ASK pl UK, Y K C Sk plus K, and then we get the ABCD mattress. Okay? So x1k plus one is x2k, so this will be zero and one right this time this gives you this zero here. R? Second equation here -0.72 is one k and then 1.7 x two is, then plus k is one, right? You get a A B matris. From this equation here, so y is x one, so one, zero and then zero here. A B, CD matrices, you got it there. All right. When system is described by difference equation, we defined variable, you can obtain the state space mode, right. Give me about 10 minutes more. Okay? I want to finish this. Instead of moving to next week where we will be talking at other issues, okay? Now. We have discussed so far, a system, right? State space, right? A system model in stat space, right? S K plus A Sk plus, UK, Y K C Sk plus DUK One system. But in practice in practice. The system is looking at can be very complex, right. It can be one subsystem here, one subsystem here interconnected. And each subsystem has its own stage space model. And this interconnection, what will be the overall stage space model? I see? Okay. So we start with the simple one. Okay. We have two systems in para first. So system one. Okay, system one and system two, each has its own stage space model. So the input u1u 1k1k, you put it yourself. I'm trying to save time. And then X one ka1b1. This one means one K p one is maybe I'll write down. Okay. This subsystem has its own input on on ABCD *****, respective state factor, right? X12. They are in parallel like this. Overall input is R K, and this output is Y K. So what would be the overall state space model? All right. So it will be like the overall state vector is x1k, x2k, and the input is R K, put is Y K. What is the overall state space. Let's do together? R k. The output equation, will come to it. Okay. You can see on this equation here, s1kp one is A one, A one, A one is zero here, B one. One u u one is same as R K. R K equals to u one equals to u two. This goes to B one int of R K. B u one is same as R K. B1u1 is same as d1r. The second equation then, x2k plus one is zero A two, B two, b2u2, the same as b2rk. We have the ste equation now for this pyro system. In terms of the stick vector given input here. Now, output. The output here is y1k plus two k. Right? Is that right? Then Why one is this right? Okay. But your U one is the same as R K, and U two is the same as R K. Now you can write there in terms of your matrix and D matrix. I R K. C1x1, C one here plus c2s2, C two here. D one rk plus d2rk d one plus d two. We get your output equation also do. And this is state equation,sut equation, or a system. Okay? Now, cascade system. Do you have this system with a state space model, cascading via another system another stat space model. What is the overall stat space model? Okay. Let's do this System one. No space, so I do this. This is one. Two system cascading. So system, you have u one. You have Y one. This is u two, Y two. Cascading. And this is the overall, overall input K. Okay. What is the ot space model? So we do it slowly one at a time, this one year. This one year. And U one is equals to r k, right? So these are k. And simulate for this y one. So this is K. No difficult, right? That subion based on the system connection, one is K. Okay. Two k plus one, maybe a different color. 22 plus b2u. U two, u two is u two is Y one, is it? Okay? The u two here is equals to y one. So this is Y one. So I spend this. This y one, Brake, right? So you get. Okay. Then you get expression of s2k. Now, you have two equation now, right? S1k plus 1s2kp one. Now we write the state equation. I'm sorry. This must be R K. Over here. Now. Okay? On this equation here, this will be A one. This will be zero, right? This will be. On this equation here, this will be. One k one. No now from this equation. So this entry here must be here right. That's two k plus one this time, this must be a two and here must be two d one. You get your state equation. You get your state equation. As for the Put equation, y k is y two, y ky2k plus. This is d two. Two is y one. Two k is equals to y one. Okay? So this is equals to y one is this one. So from here, you can get your CD metris equals to, right? So D 2c1x1, c2x2 here, C two, D 2d1r. You get your state equation. You get your output equation for the cascaded system. Each of them has its own, state space model. All right? If you go further, you can also obtain and let's say, you know, a system one, and u one, y one, and then a system two output is Y two, input is u one, right? And then in the feedback system. This input. This is output. You may want to practice this when you're free. This is a space model by self. Space model by itself. What the overall space model, input is R K, output is Y K in terms of the state vector x1k s2k in the feedback configuration. We do this and then we cask another one, we do this again, et cetera. Okay. Finish. Thank you for joining me yeah, so we call we finished. Go evening, right? So I'll see you next week again. We do lecture too. Okay? Thank you for coming.
