Let's start. Testing first, the back and hear me. Hear me. Thank you. Okay. Thanks for coming this evening. Singapore's weather today. Very zy. All right. Also healthy. Anyway, This is our second lecture of five lectures. And last week, we begin the discussion on the space space consent. We started around with how he can apply or use to model continuous time system, right? In this state space model, right? So you have your state equation, and you have the output equation, right? We give examples or discuss examples where the continuous time system, right can be modeled from differential equation. Using physical laws, right that describe the physical behavior of this system, right? We for example, we look at Newton's law, force is massation, another example, right? And it defines the variable, and then we obtain a First order differential equation of those state variables, x one dot two dot, and then you compact them in the matrix form like this where you have your state vector there, right? X t. And we also went on to have some analysis in continuous time domain. Specifically, we solve the state equation, right to get the We call this the state transition equation x t. In terms of the solution is in terms of the P t, the state transition matrix, which you can obtain. All right. Taking the inverse cross transform of Si minus A inverse. So we so this state equation in of solution is in of V. And from the state equation, we can have the t function, S, right? So we simplify the right hand side, you have the transfer function. Then we have a break then, we went on to look at disketizing, the continuous time sk space model sampling the continuous system using zero or the hole. So we can have the zero or the whole equivalent, zero or the whole equivalent. Where your disputize system your AD that is the A matrix of the disputi system, is the state traditional matrix evaluated at sampling period t. So sample different values of t, so your AD will be have different numerical values. The B matrix of the disputize system you solve this pin in the group. Then you get your B matrix of the discrete system. C, the D is the same as the CD matrices of the continuous time system, right? And then we also went on to solve the state equation by recursion, remember, and we have that solution. And we also look at the examples of where the physical system can be described by some difference equation. And from there, we also can obtain a stat space model give the stat variables defined, B example, we also have looked at the pase of interconnected system, where you may have a subsystem here, here, here, here, interconnected each of them has is respective space representation. What will be the overall space representation, let's say two subsystem in cascade example. We look at some examples last week. This basically some of the thing we talk about in the last week lecture. Now, we'll continue our lecture too. And before that, right. On the actual discussion, we first look at the motivation. Of this the next subtopic of the stick variable analysis for discrete time system. The topic we're looking at is similarity transformation. Again, because the school of electronic engineering, as I mentioned last week, most of my examples are electrical or in nature. So we're looking at here electrical system represented by the second di gram, inductor here capacitor here and the resistor. All right. So we will have the current the inductor as most variable. And the voltage across the capacta as antic variable. We call this X one, and we call this x two. If you call this X one, we call this x2s okay. You just have a different sts model. Right? So after you have defined the variable for the system. Then the next step as we did last week is to find the first order differential equation, this is the continuous time system. X1.s2 dot. So you make use of couch current law, troot law, move. Basic electrical circuit analysis. You will arrive at for example, x one dot is minus x two plus u, and two dot is x one minus x two, And if this is your output of interest, y is x two, so you get a C matrix. This is the state space model for this system. Now, your friend next to you may assign this match con as X one, mas con as x two. A different set of state variable. The x1s2. And with respect to this St variable x1s2. Go on to apply analysis to five X one and S two bar, right? In this case, you can use match analysis and to vote or card by example. Right? Doing that, you will arrive at X 1 bar dot is minus X 1 bar plus S two bar plus u, and S two bar dot is minus S 1 bar plus u. So you compa that in the usual matrix, make the form. Then you get your x is A X plus B U, A and B matrix. And C matrix, y in terms of S one and S two. You get the C matrix. Here is one s space model, right with respect to the stack vector here. And then another stack space model, with respect to the spat vector s1bs two bar. So you have two stat space model, and they represent the same system, right? The same system. And you have two state space models. So this two space model will be has to be related. The stick v stick variables has to be related, in what way. Physically, physically, meaning from the system, that's better here, right? Okay. You can see that now in this branch here, you have x one, and the match current is x 1 bar, so the x one is equals to x 1 bar. You can see from the circuit physically, right? The relationship between x x two and x 1 bar. In this branch here, the branch current here is X two. Which is equals to the mat current x1r minus x two, which is going up one ring, this basic sec analysis. So we rearrange this equation. So x 1 bar is x one, then from this equation, x two will be s one minus x two. And x 1 bar is x one. S two bar is x1x2, S 1 bar is x one. This equation here, it relates the new state variable. X 1 bar and S two bar. In terms of the x one and x two. Now we compare them in matrix form. So X 1 bar, this dumbs is x one, and S two bar this dumbs is x one minus S two. Here we have this relationship. X bar is equals to the original s vector here, multiplying by a non singular matrix. That's a key. You see this matrix here is no singular. The determinant is not zero. So the inverses. So x bar is verse balms x. So with this motivation, so you can look at the general case. So you start out with a s sas model. In terms of the stat X k, and the u is your input and y k is the output, right? So you have your X k p on the A X k p k and k C X p d. So we write in this mi. This means S K plus one A Sk plus Bu K or the stick equation, are the system matrices for the Apple equation. Okay. You start with this space model in terms of the given stick vector k. Then you obtain a new stick vector. Let's call this A K. You see, in the example, it was it was X bar, right? Okay. So let's call this a new stick vector K, right? Okay. And how do you get this W K is using the original stick vector, and then you multiply any no singular matrix P. A no singular matrix P, you multiply it, you get a new stick vector K. In terms of this new stick vector, a K, you will have corresponding space mode, A, B, A. In other words, this means K plus one is k p, the K is the same, y k, is that right? So you multiply the given original stack vector b no singular matrix P. The question now is K is the new state vector, What we are doing here is a system model or space technique. They can have space for. We say that the space where x belongs. The space where x belongs is mapped into another state space where the new state vector belongs. This mapping is by a linear transformation matrix, no singular transformation matrix, right? So if we do this, then what will be the relationship Between the new A matrix call respect to the new state vector in terms of the original A and your transformation matrix P. So what's the relationship, right? Similarly for B also, right? A, et c. So let's look at the general resolution. Given a stat space model of a system, given one, we can dive another stat space model through similarity transformation. This is the given state space model. The similarity transformation process is taking the original stack vector and multiply it by a non singular matrix P. And you get a new stack vector, this K here. K? All right. So in this manner here is the same as writing X K is P W K. So on 5.3, A k plus one will be p inverse x k plus one, and k plus one is here is y 0.1, this is x k plus one. X k is p. You get the next equation here. Substitution. P inverse AP is your new A matrix. In terms of the new stick vector, W K. This is the new A matrix. P inverse B is the new B matrix in terms of the s vect K. C is CP, and the sa. This simple substitution give rise to the new A matrix with respect to a K is d, So when you write, Cat D here, small letter D there, you're referring to here single input, single output case, scale case. Scale D. Okay. So to this lecture, I know it can be quite d. So I I'm going a bit slower. Hope you can follow the g of it. We start with a stat space model. Now, and then we obtain the new sta vector by multiplying the original state vector by ending no singular matrix P. The mapping the sta space where x belong is mapped into another sta space k belongs. So when you do this mapping, right? What are the things that are not changed? Not change. The first is the characteristic polynomal. Characteristic polynomial means determinant number I minus A. As the characteristic polynomal, to zero. You get the eigen values of A. Right? You tab in this case is P inverse AP. So you write like this. This cancer actually is just identity matrix, and you have this term here. This is the word terminal cancer. You can see the characteristic pino ma respect to eight, and A, they are the same eigen values of eight and A, no change. No change. No change. The other thing that is not changed or record it invariant transfer function is invariant under singularity transformation. The transform function is not change. C Z minus A inverse B plus t equals to this in terms of k. If you substitute all this into here, you find the left hand side equals to right hand side. Some simple matrix algebra. If you look at one example, right? So in terms of x k, right? Sorry. In terms of x t, this is a continuous time system, right? You can have your transfer function, right? The transfer function is one p, we have over here. So in terms of this space, Y over S. This is continued time case using similarity transformation in continue time. The css function is also invaded? Under similar transformation. S A in B, C, SI minus A, this is, and then you will get one. You can verify this. This is a transfer function in terms of x t. In terms of x bar t, y over S, maybe I use a different color. C is this one, right. S minus A, B. So I'm using a example to illustrate that the transfer function is embedded. You can work it out they are the same, right? So The transfer function is invariant similarity transformation. Some student, they have noticed this. This is a block diagram representation for the system in terms of the stick vector input and the Y here. Then you do a similarity transformation. You get the new stick vector Then you have a new set of system matrices, with respect to the new sake actor here. But you can see same U, same y. The transform function, why is that O use that? Why is that O use that. No change. Invariant under similarity transformation. So you have the same transfer function. And what can you say about this for the system, they can have no unique state space model. They have many, right? But for the same and unique transfer function. Do you get that? Okay. Now, we start off with a given state space model, with respect to a given stack vector, If we multiply the original stack vector by any no singular matrix P, we get the new vector. So they can have. You get man right? Sometimes we may wish to transform CR, if it is possible, if it's possible, a given stat space model into a certain forms, certain canonical forms, whereby the new A, B and C are of certain structure. If a sta space model in those canonical forms, there are a few advantages. There are some advantages. For example, right design controller, easy, things like this. We'll come to that. All right. So now we'll look at some of those canonical forms. Whereby A, B, and C or C matrices of the transform the sectic vector a and form. Let's look at the controllable otical form I show the CCF. CCF. All right. We will study this few form first. And then on, we will discuss later on in the data pro this course in controller design, for example, we will come back to terms like this CCF. So you patient, right? You go to study this different form first. Whereby the system mattresses VC of certain forms. The first one is CCF Controllable otic form. Now, the controlable cannot form is one whereby the A and the B has this configuration structure. A on I use A. Now let's use AC's see controlable form. Now you have the B matrix, 001 and the A 01, and the last role here. The last rule here, the entries all the A is. From 6.3, which is what is 6.3, 6.3 is this one here. It is a characteristic polynomial of the given system. Determinant of i minus the A, you find a determinant, you have all the AIs there. Example, if A is this. So numna minus A determinant is this Omar. A no is 0.02 and A one is -0.3. Example. Example. First thing is, define the characteristic polynomial, and then you will get AI right. All right. And your AI negative or the values minus A no A one, et cetera. So you can form the AC and the BC matrices. So given the state space model of any structure in general ABC and structure, right? Okay. If it is possible to transform this into CCF four, then what would be the transmission matrix that you need? What would be the K matrix non singular matrix P? They will transform this VCs to a CCF. That matrix if c is given by 610. C of two matrices. One is WC. We call it. Is a name. Control D matrix. Control matrix, we'll come to that. Here now we discuss all these terms. Later on, we'll use The control matrix C is formed using the A and B matrices. The first column is B, then the next column you multiply A B, then the next column, square B until the last column A to about bus one B. N is the dimension of the system. But for example, if your state vector is x one to x three to n is three, A, the order of the system. So this is formed using A and the B matrices. Similarly, C T, is also formed using the AB, but now you're using the AC and BC matrices, which is in the CCF, CCF The first column is BC, then you multiply the last column is. When you've got these two matriss, and you got these two matriss, then you multiply them out on the verse of PC. That is the P that is required. If you use that P, if, then you will transform this where your A and B, matriss he in CCFO. CCF p. So the equation there as specified. So now we look at an example to use this example. Simple example, A is the diagonal matrix, simple example. All right. So we first obtain a characteristic polynomial. All right. Find the determinant of a minus A. So this is your A. So determinant of now we use that AI. We get this polynom. So these are your AIs. So AC, All right. The last row, negatives of the AI. So 0.4 is, -0.4, 1.3 is, -1.3, and your BC is zero, and the last entry is one. So this is your AC C. AC and BC. Okay, next. The matrix that you need is this one here, right? So is this on there. So you need the matrix of C to also. C Tudor, you use your ABC matrixes. The first column is BC over here, and then ACC, d times, d. All right. So that is WC Tua. You find the universe of this two by two. Join over determinant event for example p. This is the universe of WC tutor. The controllability matrix in terms of A and B, we use B here, AB is over here. The first column is B. This column is AB this. Then you get this. You multiply the two together. That will be similarity, transformation matrix P, that will transform the given state space model in this example into the CCF, into the CCF. If you want some practice yourself, we know that the transformation process is this and the new A matrix is P A P, P A P. This is a P, P A P, you will get this. We use a four. But if we use this P matrix, the A is in CF four. T a practice, you may verify this your new B matrix is P in B. This is a P. You find this in s and then multiply by B, you will get new B matrix in this form 01. And your new C matrix, you just multiply CP, whatever it is. That is a new C matrix. This is CFO. All right. So given the s space model, right? The transformssion matrix P, that will transform it to the CCF Foam is given by this met in terms of the contro matrix WC, C tutor. And the CCF form is one where the AC and BC in this form. Okay. I'm trying to summarize and repeat, okay? Now, the next form we're discussing is the observably canonical form. O C F. One is controllable Conical form, one is OCF. What is OC? It is one whereby in 6.1 fb the A and the C I show. I use a subscript here now, because it is s. A O is zero, zero et and the last column here, you can see negative of the AI. Again, from your characteristic polynomial, you get your AI, determine minus A. So you get your AI. Negative of the AI last column there, and your C, 001. So if your New A and C matrices are in this structure and it is in the OCF form. The question now is, what is a transformation matrix P? That can transform as this into the OCF form. So earlier on, we have P, now that's Q. That's the transformation matrix P. This is a Qs. Is the product of two matrices. To matrices your new K is the original vector multiplied by the inverse of Q. This que that you choosing is 6.15. W inverse in 6.11. Or the observability matrix observability matrix W. We will come back to this later on maybe discuss observability properties of a given state space model. We are going to talk about all this. Later on W O is formed using a A and the C matrices. The first row is C, second row is CA, and the last row is C A minus one. That is W O. And your e has another matrix here on the right hand side, W O theta. It is formed using the AO and the CO matrices in the OCF. You use this AO and the first row CO, and then second row COO, and the last row is this. And you find the inverse of O and multiply the two together. And if you use this matrix, you will transform if the Q and C is. You will transform it into the CO. A, and the C matrices. There, the structure here. So equations here and there. Let's look an example. We use the same example as before. This example. We use this example. This is an example where we find the P, they will transform this space model to the CF form. Now we want to find the Qe, they will transform this into the CF form. The Q is equals to Anu in verse a naught, right? So your AI is over there, right from this characteristic polynomal. And your A naught, you have a 01 here, and these are your AIs. So from the characteristic poomeria. The last column, the negative or the AI. Right? Go here. And your sn is zero, and then one then. Let's just prove by two, right? If it's I goes to three then zero, zero, one. Forming W nuh Tua is the C n C n A, part. The first row is 01, and the second row is this tums this, then you get one us 1.3. You can verify this. Second role there. A. Observa d matrix C C A, C is over here, one minus two, C times A, C times A over here, the last row -0.51 0.6. All right. Then this is a queue. All right. They find the inverse of this and multiply by this. So that is a que. This is a matrix that we transform the given sta space model into the OCF form where your A naught C naught is shown and your B naught the new B, we just P inverse B. In this case, we use Q, so it's Q inverse B. Okay. So that is your example to illustrate this transformation. Okay. So we have finished the CCF form O CF form, right? The transformion. V, take the given space model into the canooical forms and the observable otical forms. From a stage space model into the CCF or the OCF for VSCs. Starting point is a stage spas model. Okay. Now our starting point is a transfer function. Okay? Can forms from transfer function. A process with a given transfer function can have sta spas model in either the OCF or the CCF for written dir by inspection. Okay. All right. As described in most control engineering texts, there is a certain process flow. You follow this one, state two, et cetera. The final result is what we going to discuss here, writing down our inspection. The Tso function ratio of two polynomial, the polynomial and the zero polynomial, the AIs in the demat the BI or Bs in the numerator, right? Okay. First, you get the transform into the CCF form, right? In the CCF form, the A and the B matrices of a structure, right slight ni right here. Refer back? Yeah. A zero the b001, the last row or the a matrix or the negatives or the As. The A and the B in that particular forms, slide number nine. Now, the matrix see the subsequent C refers to the CCF form. You see the numerator, the B js, d0b1, et cetera, right? So it forms the entries in the C matrix. So by inspection, they can write the A B C. In the C, A. Similarly, the A and the C matrix in the OCF form is like the t. The structure is like the t A and C in the observable cannot form. What about the B? The B of the O C, the, you take from the, the D j B one, et cetera. The AIs corresponds to the last column negative values in the A O matrix. This mai We std this. Okay? This given transform function, G. We had to reduce it to one, which is g prime, which is the numerator polynomial is less than a denominator polynomial. Using a long di long division. So this goes inside here. All right? So use long division here, there will be two minus two es this. Then this minus d, you'll get A, so that this is equals to this and this term here minus two, that is your d value. In the spa the d values. So from here, you have your AI. You want the CCA form. So your AIs will be the entries in the last negative values, You will be 001 because we're looking at CF form and your C matuer here, the B js us 34, and your D is this value here. This is the s space model from the transform function in the CCF form. Okay. All right. Now, this example we can see one of the advantages of the S space model in the Codical form, right? So this example here is the OCF, right? The space model in the OCF. The A and the C, this structure, right? So given this this place model, you get the transfer function? You use this, right? This is a C, this is A, this is a B, right? Use this suppression, right? The transfer function, is that we use that. You work it out. You get this transfer function. As a form of practice, you can verify this. Right? So if you look at the transfer function, the denominator, the AIs over here, the numerator, the B js, the B here, and c01. Right? We'll see it for. If the s space model in this example, is in the OCF form. You can get the transfer function directly. That's how we have a reverse process. On the transfer function, we try to get the OCF Or if the space model in the CCF form, you can get a transfer function easily. So this is one of the advantage advantages of a stage space model in the oic forms. All right. Okay. So we have discussed Stace model in the CCF OCF, Okay? There are a couple of canonical forms, which is the diagonal canonical form or Jordan Cical form. We shall discuss in any standard text on control system ginery. For our purpose, we will focus on the CCF and the OCF. Let me introduce you to the don Canonical form. Using this example. Okay. So this is a transfer function that we are given. All right. You factorize the denominator. So you have the two factors there. And for those who are familiar with partial fraction expansion, you can move from here to here easily. Or you can do the long method whereby see. So the right hand side. So ubertor, one on left hand side is equal to the numerator of the right hand side. So you will get A plus B is zero. And then So you have two equation. So you solve the n is ten minus ten? This is a long method, but as I said, those who are familiar with partial fraction expansion, you get this quickly, right? E. Okay. So a som the som of two first order Ts function, right? First order transfer function is covered in the first part of this course. You can represent it delay term and the multiplier in the feedback p in this feedback configuration. You can see the transfer function from here to here will be one over z plus A. Representing this first order transfer function right? In broad by again form can be represented with a delay term in the formal path and a multiplier in a feedback path in this feedback configuration like this. A. All right. From here to here, will be tanned over z -0.9 this. From here to here, will be ten over z -0.8. So this plus and this minus, so there is a y, there is a K. Right? So transfer function, he realized it. I blocked again form in terms of lay terms and feedback multiplier. In terms of first order transfer function block. Now, then we identify the output of the delay term as the state variable. Because if this is x1k, then the input to the delay term will be x1k plus one. It is very natural and efficient, right? You can call this x1x2, and then your friend may call this x two, this x one. Though this multiplier of ten can be here, it can be also here. It can be also here so that the transort function from here to here will still be ten over -0.9. This multiplier ten here can also be here. You don't change a transfer function from here to here. So you can have different space model as we had discussed just now, right? S space model, more unique. Okay? Okay. So based on this, Diagram. You can write Ste equation. All right. So you have x1k plus one this, 0.9 x one plus k? S2k plus one here p eight plus u, is it? So you got your two st equation. From the gram. Put here, y k one, ten x one minus ten x two. You can see ten x one minus ten x two. You have your state equation up equation. Now you Put that in the t as a matrix form. Then you have your A in terms of the sick vectoria A, B, C. You can see your A matrix a tigona. We have this tigona condonic form. The A matrix is agonal form is called the gona canonical form. A form when the is almost goner, I just mentioned Jordan Colical form. If for those who are interested, you can pick up any book reference or text on control system machinery. I'm sure they discussed in detail. So we focus on the OCF CCF form, which we will mentioned again in our later discussion. Okay? All right. So these are the four anodical forms right that the A text will have diiion, no. Okay. So I hope it dry, right? But I hope my speed is low enough for you to understand. So we now have a break. T minutes? Before eight oh five, you come back. Okay. Then we continue the discussion. Oh. Okay. So that? Okay. Now, how is the controller design in this space looks like, right? So we have a plan discrete time system given, you know, 10.1, 7.2. First step. You design a state feedback controller. So we assume that the states are available. You know, the stats they are physical, it could be physical variables in the system. We see displacement the temperature there, for example, right? So you can measure them, you sensors or instruments to measure those state variables and they are available. Or feedback. All right. So you design a state feedback controller, assuming the state are available. And what is the specs will be to design the k right so that the crossp system right has certain poles at some pre assigned location, corresponding to, you know, performance, right? The location of the cross post. So it's a whole placement problem so, right? The cross pose. Design the stick feedback controller. Stick feedback, please. You're going to feedback the state, and you assume the states are available for feedback. Right? Design the key, right? That's step one. Step two, what if the states are not available? Okay. If the states are not available for feedback. Then you have to design a system. We call that and observer. A system to estimate the state from available measurements. This system that you'll be designing is observer, an observer or an estimator. The input tving the system is the Y K and the UK and the output and the input corresponding to the plan, the plan output, the plan input. And this drive the observer, and the output of the observer will be your estimator state, the call it cuter. Okay. And then you will use the estimator state. All right. You use the estimator state. To replace the true state which you don't have. That you get the design and observer to estimate the state and use the estimated state to replace the true state in your state feedback or placement problem. So these are two steps. The design method based on the pole placement problem, the design the k coupled with the state observer design to estimate the space and they're not available is one of the fundamental design method available or control engineer. The simple design. Of they are advised controller design space. Now, This concept of controllability, this term controllability, which we earlier on before the break, we have mentioned, the CCF form, Controllability, canonical form, controllability matrix, things like this is a inherent property of the plan of the plan. In fact, is a basis. The concept of controllability is a basis for the solution of K, the p placement problem. Okay? The concept of observable, which we also measure the observable otic form, OC observable matrix. The concept of observa t again, is inherent properties of the plan. Depending on the plan, the basis for the solution. Of the observer design problem, which you will see later on as we see. Before we go on to discuss the controller design and the observer design. We will do this in Lecture four. Observer design. Different types of observers. We will discuss. Then we integrate the controller design and the observer design, all right. Together. The two steps are independent we'll see later on. We call the separation principle. We designed the K, designed the observer independently separate steps, right? So before we go to look at controller design or observer design, we discussed the concept of contro and observability. The concept of contro and observability. First, controllability? Okay. The plan S K plus one is Ask p k. In the last lecture right here, slide 54. You can refer. The solution. You can get shown here in 8.3. The solution to the state equation, 8.3. Requ. Well, when you expand this summation here, expand, equals to zero, I equals to one until I equals to n minus one, you, you will get this. You will get this. And then you rewrite the term in bracket in terms of You can see again now, WC, which is the controlled matrix, which we talk about before the break. The control bed matrix. And control vector here or input input vector there, zero after N minus one or the UK, the UK. This term, bring over the other side, so you have this WC U requ to this. We one is the vector u, the u zero, one, one, the u k sequence, right? This represent n simultaneous equation because your state vector is y one, x one to x n, We now te from of Dina equation. When AC has ranked n, then you can find you can find the UK to drive a given initial state to desire final state. I AC has ranked. Let me show you a numerical example to industries. So let's So you have your X k a solution to the state equation, right? Okay. You will have x one, you have a x zero plus B zero. Actually, this equation was obtained from the state equation. If you recall, and by recursion, you get to this general repion. X two is left hand side S two, right hand side S one plus u one. Right? Right? So you subit one into here, then you get a square x0s, AD this? Now, we write in terms of controllable matrix. So here, you have a square this is a A B. This is your control ding matrix. This is your U V control or input K. Okay? So your b the other side, then you have this. So given the initial state is given. All right. You can find that you You can find the u0u1. The input sequence that will drive a given initial state to any desired X two, if your WC is non singular. You bring multiplyable b sit by the inverse of this. You can find this solution, right? This is this is basically what you mean here. Okay. T. If that give rise to the definition of controllability. The PA AB is controllable. Some author like to use this the P A B. Most author will use, the system is contro things like this. The P A B is contro or the system is controllable because the contro is based on the rank of controllable matrix, which is formed using the A and the B matrices. Instead of saying the system is controllable, Some a will just imply that the pair A V is contro implied stem is controllable. If it is possible to find the sequence, the control sequence zero, the U M minus one, allow the system right to reach arbitrary final state on the initial state. And that is even only if the controllability matrix is full. Full n, how do you check the full rang status of a square matrix defined determined determined is no zero, is ints full ran. Okay. Example. So again, we use some electrical networks, case. In this case, a practical example to illustrate this concept of controllability, which we have defined earlier on. So there's only one energy storage element. So the voltage across the capacitor will be the only variable x t. If the x t the initial time t t equals to zero is zero, x zero is zero, and the voltage across it will be zero for any values of u t, because of the symmetry of the network. They cannot transfer the initial state x zero to any non zero x t. The state equation describing this network is uncontrollable. You want to check the controllability of a given space model representation. You check that the rank of the controllability matrix is full rank, based on the theorem, F n. For example, this system here is A here, B here. You must first form the controllab matrix. The first column is B. A. This is the first column B. I go to the doctor line here to show you that this column is the A B is also 11. The second column here. The determinant is zero. So WC is not rank equals to two. It is uncontrollable or this space model represented. Represented by the state equation, S K plus one A sk plus u K. Another example, investigate the of the following system. F at sequence, If you assist to drive the system from the origin. Initial state is an origin. When you write it means that x10 s20 initial time zero, zero. That's what they mean that. Initial state is zero. T X two equals to this. How do you solve this problem? Fy, the sequence S, right. But first, you check the controllability. This is B here, A B will be this column here. The determinant is Minus one of zero. I is controllable. That means there will be the UK that will derive from the given initial state here to here. Now, we find that K X two is B U one plus A zero. The initial state is zero, remember, we went through this from the state equation. The initial state is zero. X k p one Ask p k. X one is initial state is zero. X one is a zero, so we have this. And given that x two is here, Right hand side, you can see that you can find that u zero is this and then another equation, you can find u one, easily. You drive from the initial state, which is the origin to x two equals to this. These are the u zero and u one. We are solving this using simultaneous equation, or if you like, what we D here. You can write in terms of the coning matric. So you have here. So, zero, one, just of the contro matrix which you can find easily. This one is just a one inverse the inverse of this two by two matrix. Okay, you prefer to solve using Smtaneous equation or you prefer inverse of a matrix, just two by two. Ser is a s, right? Okay. Another example, right? I'll give you a lot of examples. Okay. Be this subject Somatic involved. That is A G. So I'll give you examples we illustrate many of the equations. Here is a three by three A matrix. That means you will have x one, x two, x three, three state variable. You want to find the control sequence Is again. The initial state is here now. You want to drive it to x three over here. All right. From this general solution, you expand this when k equals to three, they will come to here. Actually, you don't need to remember the formula. You can start from the state equation, S k, proximity, x k plus k, X one is this, S two, x three, et c substitution, you come to here, X three. It is desired that S three is Oh, yeah. Okay. And S three is here, x zero is here. When you bring this term over this side, A three, three by three matrix, you multiply by itself three times. Then you multiply by x zero, bring over this side, and then you have this vector here. This is the result of x minus A three, e30. That's where this matter comes from numerical value. Bring over this side. No. And then you obtain a squared B, A B and B squared B, A B and B. And combine them again in the of the control D matrix. This is a B, A B equ B. In terms of the u vector, u zero, u one and u two. If you want, you can solve this these three equations simultaneously or u two, u one, u zero, or this vector is the inverse of this this, so you get this. All right. These are the input vector, 01 and two that will drive the system from initial state to here. When you apply this one, two, starting from this point, X three will be here. Now, to show that it is true. In the next slide, in the next slide. You have the state equation, S k plus one as k plus bu k, x one is this, x two is this, S two is this. And you will substitute. You zero into here, and then you get x one. Substitute into here with u one, and then you get x two, subtitu into here with u two, and then your x three is the place where it is desired. This is a very simple example to move from xo2x. From x zero to x three. I suppose you desire to move from x five sing ocasion to x eight, instead of x zero to x three, then 56. And in the same way from the state equation that you can find the corresponding x8x8 is a Q x five plus square B u five, et c similarly from the state equation. In a similar way, you will be able to fu5u6 and u sen being the same value as zero u one, u two. A Let me give you more examples, sir. Suppose you have a system represented by this form, another subsystem. And then And for each first order transfer function block, as we mentioned earlier on, you can represent it with a delay, right? In the forward path and the multiplier in the feedback path. So the output the de term, you have a state variable. Let's say x1k s2k like that. A system represented in block again form like this, you have corresponding to this block, you have a state variable, and this block, you have another state variable. Okay. So in this example, it is obvious that the input UK has no influence on this variable, right? On the app. So it is. Okay. So this is an system. What about this? What about a system represented in this bron bigram. So is it contro? So you may want to draw this. I'll give you time. The same system example I will use when we discuss the topic on observability. Keep it. The system represented in brock diagram form like this. Okay? So output of the delay term, your x1k, and this one has been called x2k. All right. And to check the contro of a system. If you're copying, worry. Give you time. I'll continue. Is it okay? To check the controllability of the system, we must check the rank of the control matrix, which is depending on the A and D matrix. Now you need the state equation. So we're going to write or obtain the state equation for this system. So my inspection from the Brock diagram form, and in fact, we have earlier on a few examples right from the Brock diagram, we write the state equation. Right? This is x1k. This will be x1k plus one. Here will be x2k plus one. So over here, we have x1k plus one is minus plus k. On equation, one state equation there. X2k plus one now. Over here, x2k plus one. Over here. Over here is eight x two. P. And this is k minus x one. Right? That's direct, right? This is x k minus x one. So plus k minus x1k, so we write. So equation two. Then you can now write the state equation, Okay. So from the equation one, equation one, we look at here. So this entry will be -0.2, and then he one, right? Or. Equation two here, minus one is one point A, and what about here, so one, you have obtained the state equation from the block tigram four. This is A, this is a B, You control matrix, you have to form. The first column is B, here, right. Then the next column A B. What do you get? A B. What is this A B? This time you get. Minus p two. What about here? This one here. So -0.2, A B, right? So the determinant equals to this time minus this this is zero, right? So Uncontrollable. So you have an uncontrollable system. So this the next time we will discuss the observability, using the same example. Okay. So before we finish this topic, this is another example, a practical example of a bridge circuit logical network. And the state variable the current through the inductor and the voltage across the pastor. So you then go on to use cho current voltage law, whatever necessary in olical circuit analysis to find S one dot, S two do equation, right? And then you come back then. I will ask you to, you know, test you on this, you know, electrical network. So that's an example. And you will find the A and the B matrices as shown here in terms of the circuit components. Okay. All right. So you have your A there and the B there. You want to check the o the controllability of the system, then you will have to do this. You have to find the controlling matrix. The first column is B, second column A times B, you get this. F here, you can see that when this condition holds, this will be zero, and this condition hold, Your determinant of the controlling matrix will be zero, so it will be uncontrollable. It is actually a condition to balance the bridge, to balance the bridge. You can see the statement here. In that case, the x2s2 here cannot be varied by the extended input. Another example, Practical example on the controllability of the Okay, Qi, Summary. We have talked about similarity transformation. And what we do here is, you're given the system Saed model. And then We do a similarity transformation. You get the new stick vector, a K, and in terms of that, you have your corresponding system matrices. And the relationship between the system matrices of this and this, we derive easily, as is, right? Okay? Then we discussed the controllable canonical form, the CCF form, the OCF form, controllable oical form, observable Coical form, and of course, there are others diagonal and Jordan Cical form. We do the transformation, the characteristic polynomial is not changed. The transform function is embedded. And we move on to controllability. The concept is, basically, you have your initial state, and you want to drive the initial state. I if U zero, one, et cetera are available. To drive a given initial state to a desired final final state, then this is controllable. This basically what it means, right? To check contro check that the rank of the controllability matrix, is full ran. So that is full rank. A from the A and the B matrices. So this is essentially the G so this lecture two. Okay. You don't mind, I spend a bit of time and move to Lecture three, or you want to end here. And we do lecture three next week. I think I cant because we're going to take some time for the quiz four. All right. Let's see how far we can go. All right. Give me another short period. Now, Lecture three, we have discussed the topic of controllability. Let's see this? Okay. You have the stage space model. You have the Sag space model of the system, right? Now, suppose that psu without any loss of generality, UK, We just have x k plus one is A k, y k is c k. Then what do you get? You get y zero, cs zero, x one is a x zero, y one is c x one is C S zero, is x one. The output equation. Right then left hand side, we can write. This equation here, this equation here, right? If if this matrix is no singular, then the initial speed, given by this. Why is the up data of the plant. So given the data of the plant. If this matrix is non singular, we can find the initial state. As you mean K is zero without loss of generate. So you can find the initial state. So now we move to the observability, right? You understand what I'm trying to say just now? Right? Observability is a property of a system, which is strongly related to the ability, to determine the initial state based on the input and the output. Okay. So the next column, observability, which we're going to discuss now, I based on the input and Oput, you can find the initial state. Let me say it is observable. It is a property of a system which strongly related to the ability to determine the initial state, based on the input and the output, right? Without any loss of generate like I did later on, UK is zero. If UK is not zero, what happened is you got one more term there and one more term there, that's all. You got one more term there, one more term there. That's all right. But the final result is still the same. You still need to rank the rank of this to be full, singul this match. Right? So we assume without loss of generality, simplify the revision that uk is zero. And from the output equation, y zero is c x zero, Y one is c x one, I did earlier on, right. So we come to this equation. 9.3. And from the theory of linear equations again, if this matrix has full rank, n equals to the n, then you can find the initial state. You can find the initial state. If this matrix is singular, you can find the initial state. This one I mean there. All right. The definition is this. The A C now is observable. Let's like early on, we use the P A B is controllable. Because the observability is dependent upon the observing matrix, we depends on the A and the C matrices. So this let's say, the P A C observable. But in the system is observable. Vice versa, if there is a final such that the knowledge of the inputs and the outputs are sufficient to determine the initial state. All right. The knowledge of the input and the output data allow allow you to determine the initial state. The system is observable. And to check the observable, you check that the rank of the observable matrix is full, and is the order of the system. So the concept of controllability and observability, I draw in very simple comes there, hope you understand. Right. But you check the observability. You check that the rank of the observy matrix is full ran? To see whether when you check in the controllability of the system. All right. So that's cop. Equation is here. Okay. Summarizing? No, Ptical example again talk about control BT. We talk about the BT this pic example. Again, the current to the inductor is one state variable and the voltage across the capa is another state variable. Suppose this is a output that you indicated the votage across the two resistor. Okay. Non zero x one and x two initial values by site a response inside this loop. However, your UT is occurrent here by UMS, is always equals to two times UT, the output, Always this regardless of what the initial values are, regardless of what the initial values are. You can't determine the initial state from the input and the output in this system, which is not observable. Controllability and observability depends on what you consider as input and output. You instead use y two as an output, then the system becomes observable. If you cannot control the system, the variables from a certain input. If it's possible, you may choose another input possible, and then it becomes controllable. Troll and observability depends on what is considered as in and out. Okay. I think I will stop here tonight. Remaining time, if any of you have any questions, I'll happy to answer. I not, I'll see you next week for continuing this lecture. Thank you for coming. Mm. The top of. A side. And I see D. As us. A. Thank you. As. I was Not in. I do it
