Okay. Can you hear me? All right. Thank you for coming. The last lecture, we discussed the similarity transformation, where we have a system with a given state based model, and we obtain another state stage model by multiplying the original state vector by a non singular matrix. P, we call it the similarity transformation matrix, right? And we look at the few canonical forms, the controllable canonical forms, the observable canonical form, right? In particular, what are the similarity transformation metrics that we can use, to transform it to the given state space transform it to the CCF or the OCF form? And we also discussed the notion of controllability. All right. So basically what it is is you're given the initial state. And we try to transfer this to some final destination. If we can find the u zero, one, et cetera, to transform it to the final destination. And to check the controllability, we check the rank of the controllability matrix. We call it W subscript C, which is a function of the A B matrices, right? So you form the controllability matrix using the B, the first column, and then the next column is AV until the last column is A minus one. B. I check that this is full rank, then it is controllable, right? For the given system be a given stat based model. And we went through some examples, numerical examples, and I also gave you some physical examples, the meaning of controllability. Looking at the abstract sense definition and to check the rank of the contro matrix. We started off also discussing another notion, which is the notion of observability. All right. So basically, what it means here is ing the plan in and the if you can determine the initial state, right? You're saying the system is observable, is observable. And we discussed also how do you check, the observability by checking the rank of the observability metrics to be full rank. The observay matrix is dependent on the matrix C and A. So the first row is C and followed by CA and the last 
row C A and minus one, A? So That's where we stop the previous lecture. So now, this evening, sorry, this morning, we will continue the discussion. Consider this example here, 3.2. So A C is given. This is from the state equation and the output equation. So we want to know whether that given plan with this A C metric Is it observable? So what we do is we check the rank of the observable matrix. So you can see the first row is C over here, and the next row will be C A. So you multiply C A, and then you get this. The determinant of this thumbs minus this thumbs, is zero. So this particular system is not observable. Very easy to check, right? Another example. Consider the following system, find the initial state if given u01 equals to zero. Your AC is given. The output is given. They are given. Find the initial state, if it's possible. We form the observer rating matrix. The first row is C, and then second row, C A, C, which is over here. The determinant is minus one not zero, so it is observable and we can find the initial state. A So how do we find the initial state? You have here the 9.3 in the earlier slides. You take a look. So the given data for the output over here, y0y1 is here. This matrix is actually the observability matrix. From here, you may like to solve this directly, because on the left hand side is one. So the right hand side you have here, this time this, so x20 is one. This time this, and the second equation, x10 plus x20 is 1.2, then you get x10. This is 9.3. We don't need to remember formula, we can solve this using the output equation. Y k is cx K. We use the output data here, y zero is one, y one is 1.2. So y zero is c x zero, the fen side is one. This is C, this is your initial state. This time this gives you x20 equals to one. Y one is cx one, which is 1.2 is given, from your state equation, you have k plus one x k plus bu k, so x one is this, and u zero is zero, zero, so the left hand side and the right hand side, span then you have this. So 
some of you may prefer to use matrices directly. So from here, in terms of the observability matrix here, would be equals to the inverse of this that. Right? Some may want to use matrix algebra to find the inverse of this this and the answer you have it directly. So this is the initial state. Okay? That's an initial state. Okay. Give you more examples. So we have here a block diagram representation of a system. As I mentioned before, relating to this first order transfer function block, you can realize it using a delay term with a feedback multiplier. In a feedback system. So and then we assign the state variable Maybe you call this x1k for this block, s2k over there, the output of the delay term. In this example, the upper block here, which is related, the x1k, it does not contribute to the output here, y k. This is an unobservable system. Right? And what about this one? What about this one, right? Is this observable? Is this system observable? Sometimes we can look by inspection of a given system and we can decide. But sometimes it is not so straightforward. So what we may have to do is to find the stage based model and then check the rank of the observer reading matrix. And we will do in this simple example. So we you realize this or transfer function block using the lay term and the feedback multiplier. So this corresponds to this transfer function, this corresponds to this transfer function block there. So a sign, stick variable here. So here, we call it x1k s2k over there. All right? I'll put up the delay. Over here will be s1k plus 12k plus one. Right? This signal here? And with that, we can write state equations? So here, x1k plus one is 0.9 x1k. On the equation over here, s2k plus one is two k p one is 0.8 x2p, right? So we write this equation from the block diagram. And the output equation, p. So with that. We can write a state equation to get your A matrix. There should be U K here, No space. From this equation here, you can fill in the entries over 
here, so this 0.9, zero, and then zero. From this equation two, 0.8. This is one and is X one plus X two. Right? So this is our A matrix. This is our C matrix. I'm looking giving you a very simple example to illustrate the idea. You can now find the observy matrix, CCA. The first row is C, and then the next row C, C, you get this. Which is non singular. So it is observable. It is no singular. Observable. Over here, this is the other example which we use when we look at discussing contro, I L two. Now with this same example, the question is, is it observable? Right? Is it observable? We have already obtained the state equation. Previously. This is a A matrix. Now, we will try to obtain the C matrix in the output equation. The output is over here, k, k is one signal here, x2k plus this one. This one is over here. This one is k minus x1k. Simple, right? K minus x1k. Plus, X two gives you k. Okay? Now, you be familiar, Aori. And get your C matrix. In terms of the stick vector. Excuse me. So from here, minus x one, so minus one, X two is here, u is one here. So this is your C matrix. You form the observably matrix, CCA using this example now, this is a C, and then you multiply C and the A to get the next C. You practice and you get this. What is the determinant of this matrix? This will be zero. So it is a unobservable system. Okay? By now, you should be familiar that you can represent a system in quite a few ways, right? We can represent the system using stag space. Right? In space, we just discussed notion of and observability. And for the system, the same system, you can represent it using transfer function. Why is that O U that? In transfer function, we have notions of poles and zeros. In the state space, we have notion of contro and observability. How are they related is given in this theorem. Or we use the result rather than trying to prove the theorem, which you can find in many textbooks or reference book. For example, one in BC, one of the reference book. Is in 
two parts. The first part is, if the input output transfer function of a linear time evariance system has post zero cancellation, then the system will be either, unobservable or both, depending on how the state variables are defined. All right. The second part is if the transfer function does not have pot zero cancellation, then the system can be represented by a completely controllable and observable system. So I will now give you numerical examples to illustrate this, And we are discussing the similarity transformation, the various forms, controllable canonical form observable canonical form. And one of the area we also discussed when you have a transfer function given, and then they can write by inspection of the transfer function using the coefficient in the denominator, these are the AIs, and the coefficients or the polynomial is in the numerator. There is a BJ. Here, You can see that there is a zero and the poll at the same location. There's a poll zero cancellation in the transfer function. Okay. And suppose you expand the denominator. So you have this and this, the pose and the zero polynomial. You can write a state space model, A, you write in CCF form will be 01 here, the B will be 01, and the AIs here, the negative values are give you the last row and trees here. We went through this, The CCF from the from the transfer function. For the C matrix, the coefficients, these are the so called B j in the numerator. So 0.2 is here, one year, coefficient in the numerator polynomal. Now, if you work out the WC using this B and the A matrix here, which is in CCF form. B is here, this sum over here, the terminant is zero. This is controllable system, which is by the name, controllable canonical form. It's controllable. However, if you form the WO, so the first row is C, then CA, you'll find that determinant is zero, so it's unobservable. Controllable but unobservable. Another example is, you can write OCF four. Observable can only go four. The AI here gives you the 
entries in the last column here, negative values, the C is 01 in this structure, this is OCF. And your B matrix is using the coefficient in the numerator polynomial, the B js, over here. And this state based model here, which is in OCF form. If you form the W O, you will find that it is observable because the rank is full rank. If you form the WC, using this p here, AB here. The determinant is zero, so it's uncontrollable. Okay. M example, huh? Now, in this example, it is quite clear that your has no effect on The state variable there. So this is controllable system. I like what we did earlier, given the block dig eralization, we will write the state equation, and we get the A B matris. Here, x1k plus one is -0.2 x1k. S2kp one, this is no, sor min 0.5 x two, and then here is x one here. The output is two. So now we compact this in the matrix vector form, and you will get this. For example, s1k plus one, you get -0.2 x1s2 k plus one, this um to recover this equation and the output equation this dumb, you get a C matrix. So if you were to check the control rating matrix B, and then A B. O here. The rank is not full, determining the zero e is not controllable. Right? All right. If you form the transfo function, right? Transfo function. So your C is here. I minus A inverse? And this is a B. You work this out, one over determinant times the a join where you the tigon elements, put a negative sign there. Then you multiply by, multiplied by B, and what you get is over here. And you can see that there is a pole and zero cancellation in the transfer function. The state space model in this example is uncontrollable. Loss of and observability due to sampling. In a lecture one, if you recall, we have a continuous time system. Given the state space model, S p is CX. The zero order hole equivalent, may we sample this with a zero order hole or the equivalent discretize space model. The e matrix of the discretize system is the value of the stick condition matrix, evaluated at the 
given spring period t. Remember, we work this out SI minus A inverse, and then every entry there, we do the inverse transform. As for the B matrix of the discreti system, We do this f the integral, and then you get your A, B matrix of the discrete i system. For the discrete system, the and the observatory matrix, you depend on the AD, BD and the C matrices. You can see quite obvious now, that if the changes. For example, if your sampling period t is point 1 second, let's say, then you will have some numerical values of AD, C, and you will have some numerical values of BD. You work this out and you will have some numerical values in the entries of WC and W O. If your T is point 0.1, let's say 0.5, then what happen? The numerical values of this and this will also change. So I may happen that it may happen that for a certain value of the sep period T, K WC and W O loses rank. Loses ram, meaning lost controllability, en observability due to sampling. Even though the original continuous time system is n observable. When you sample a continuous time system, the resulting discrete time system mattresses depend on the sampling period t, which I just explained just now, right. For the discrete time system to be controllable, it is necessary that the initial continuous time system be controllable because the allowable control signals for the sample system a subset of the allowable control signal for the continuous time system. So the controllability and observability of the discrete type system may be lost for certain values of t, right? So let's look at one example? This is this example is actually very common. You'll find in numerous books on this topic, right? To illustrate the loss of observability. So when you sample the system. The s based model is given by this of the continuous time system. It is a harmonic oscillator. You form the controllability of the continuous time system, this is B, this is A, A times B. It is controllable and the observable t matrics C CA, it 
is controllable and observable system. The continuous time system. Now we discretize this with a zero or whole semp zero or hole, and to find the A B of the discrete i system how we do this, right? All right. So your state tradition metrics, Si SI minus this is A. As I So the inverse of this one determinant. But multiply by the joint, and you swap the diagonal elements and put a minus sign over the remaining elements. This is the inverse. All right. So you'll find the look up the table. The inverse plus transform cosine Omega t. And you have this. Over here. So your AD A matrix of your district tied system is evaluating the st transition matrix at the time variable equals to the sampling period. This is your AD? For BD, you do this definite integral, and you will get to here. You have that AD and BD. C is the same, one, zero, no change. You form the controllability matrix, this is your A now, this is a B, A, and find the determinant, and form the observable matrix using the A and the C, and find the determinant, you get this expression there. The determinant of the controllability and the observy matrix. You can see There's a common sine Omega t in both cases, the sine Omega t. Omega t is equals to Q Pi where Q is any individual. For example, Q is one. Q is one. What is sine Pi? What is sine Pi? Zero, The Q is what is Pi three Pi, so zero, o. So the respective controllability and obser matrix loses rank. So the contro observability of the discrete time system is lost when Omega t equals to Q. When this whole, then he loses rank and the discreti system is not controllable and observable. You avoid this condition when you choose the spring period t. In this example? Here, we have a A here, B is here, is a function of the sampling period t. If you form the example on the observable, this is, this is A, the determinant is equals to t. In this example, you can see that as long as t is the sampling period t, is greater than zero, non zero, we have the system is 
observable. So controllability and observability may be lost due to sampling, right? In the previous example. Okay, we have a break and you come back around 1045, okay? Okay, let's start, S feedback design is one of the very fundamental design in the space of intro engineering. Okay? We have the plant. All right. And we are feeding back the state variable. So all these stat variable of the system, a? It can be like voltage here, c, you know, lost the temperature, things like this, h? And be assuming that they are available for feedback. You can measure them or the variables are available for feedback. T through a constant matrix K here. All right? We first deal with the case when the reference input is zero, h? We call this the the regulator problem. The regulator problem. I need not be zero. Later on, later on, we will discuss the design of a controller whereby this is not zero. We deal with the case R K is zero. Now, this k here, must be compatible in dimension multiplying with the stick vector x. K is a row vector. If you have x one, x two, on, then you only have k one, k two. If you have x one, x two, five, state variable, then you have k one, k two to k five. A coop system with a linear state feedback law. All right. Assuming the state variables are available, Design this k. All right. Design the K such that the coop poles are a desirable location. This is the stick feedback problem. The design the stick feedback controller that is five K such that the coast poles are at desirable location. Design this k so that the coastal pose I had some desirable location. Those locations will give you the desired coastal response. So depend on your design specs, right? All right. And we also sometimes call this take feedback problem pole placement problem, pole placement problem. To place the close poles at your desired locations, corresponding to your desired system performance that you want. Okay? Now, So UK is minus kx. This is the control over. K is minus kx. So we 
substitute k is minus kx into and then you have 11.2. This is the closed closed state equation. This is the closed state equation? So as we discussed earlier, the A matrix. In this case is a cross loop A matrix, the eigen values are identical to the pose, to the pose. So design a k such that your cross loop pose are a desirable location, and your cross loop pose, obtainable, so called a close characteristic polynomial. Characteristic polynomial is a function of a function of is A minus B k, which is the clop A matrix. Now, what is this thing here? Just to give you an example, A minus B k? So you have suppose A this is A, B, Sp, then k will be k one, k two, A minus b k is the cro the cro A matrix. A minus b. So in this numerical example, this is a minus k. Okay? So your characteristic polynomial Alpha, determinant of z minus okay? All right. So when you find the determinant of this, okay, you expand this, you will get 11.3, where the co or the power of is a function of the K one and K two. You expand this. You'll find that the coefficient In this polynomial, power, the Beta one Hat, et cetera. This one is a function of the unknown k1k2. Unknown K one, K two. You want to design the K so that the coast poles are at desirable location. Suppose this are your desirable location. Right? P1p2. This you want the coast post to be. Example, Ember, this is p1p2. All right. You want the desired pose to be here. Cross pose. A, this p1p2. Then your desired cross characteristic polynomia based on your desired pose, Alpha Cs. A, Alphas. This gives you your Alphas the desired cross lo charter polynomial. Based on the desired P one, P two. Let me the two. Equate the two. When you expand this, the coefficient, the Beta I had is a function of the unknown k1k2. And this is based on your desired close pose. So you compare the two polynomial, and then you can solve for the unknown k1k2. So the pole placement problem to solve K is to equate Alphas and Alphas, right? O method. Later on, we 
look at example on this, solve four K. Under what condition or circumstances, okay where the you can find a solution k. Under what circumstances, you can find a solution k in this pole placement problem. The answer is controllability of the system, controllability of the system. If the system is controllable, then you can find the k so that the pose of the closed loop system can be placed arbitrarily. Now we look at one example. All right. To illustrate the pole placement problem. Okay? Several motto Exam 1.2 with to point 1 second give us this state equation. Now, design a state feedback gain K such that the cross over here. Over here. We All right. That's now the example I give, your desired p1p2 is here, but now it's given to be here complex. Okay? Now, in the pole placement problem, when you're reading different box. Some authors, the specification provided or specified in your pole placement problem can varies. In this example here, the desired close poles are given in the Z plane. Z plane. In some cases, the desired coastal poles are given in the S plane. Then you need to do a mapping to find the desired z plane pole. And even sometimes the authors will specify that the desire pose with respect to tamping ratio and Omega N, right? So depending on the problem, the author. So what is the corresponding S plane poll, if this is the desired plane poll, right? Just quick recap on the undergraduate continue time case, where a pair of dominant polls, can be characterized by this two factor here, the temp temping ratio and then natural frequency radio per second. So in the S plane, this is the S plane right. You have pair of poles. Square. We see the A pair of dominant s plane poles, x1s2, characterized by tempin ratio and Omega n, you factorize this second order polynomal, you have a negative real part. The imaginary part is Omega d, which is Omega n square root of one minus c squa in the z plane, your mapping, of these two poles, S T, right? Is This is a desired Z 
plane pose, over here. After you do the mapping, either S t, this term is 0.905, this term is 0.193. F t point 1 second, with this three equation, you can find your Damping ratio n Omega n. Your time constant is one C times Omega n. All right? This is the corresponding desired Z plane pose. Correspondingly, you have the equivalent S plane pose, C and Omega n. In this these are your desired P one, P two. So is this controllable first? All right. So A and B, A and B. So you'll find the controlling matrix, you can see that determinant is not zero. So you'll be careful when you handle discrete time system, you can see a lot of decimal point, right, especially when you're sampling a continuous time system, a zero or the whole and you say the sampling period t is small. Okay. So you get very small numerical values. So don't mix up miss any zero. I mean, decimal point, a? So the system is controllable and we can find the key that will place the close loop pose over here. Place a closer pose over that. First, we find Alpha, Alpha, I gave you this simple example just now. So this is A, this is a B, so you form A minus p k and find the determinant of I minus A minus p k metric. A. So this dub this dumb this. You can see also numbers are small, but don't miss out from decimal point, Be careful. Because you multiply, especially a small number by another small number, they given smaller. So you'll be careful. So this is Alpha, based on the K. The coefficient you can see, coefficient and the power of z is a function of K one and K two. Then based on the desired, crops. Alpha that. Based on your desired cos pose, Alpha sees that is over here. Your cos pose, P one and P two is given. So you expand this, you get this. Then one of the method is to match is to match this polynomial and this polynomial. What do you mean by match? We look at the cohsion of. In Alpha is this term over here. In Alpha is this term. This is based on your desired cro pose. And the In Alpha z, you have this 
term equals to 0.819 in Alpha C. Two equation there two unknown K one and K two, you solve this two equation simultaneously. This is a k1k2. This simultaneous equation. Okay, this is one of the method to solve the pole placement problem, which is to find k so that the clos poles and some desired location. So we designed the K. Design the K, so that the close poles are at the desired location, P one, P two, P three, et cetera, right? The question now is, what about the zeros? You design the K so that the clos poles are at some desired location. What about the zeros? What about the zero? Now, we lecture one. Even the A B CD matrices, we can find the zero polynomial, zero polynomial. This part here z I minus this A. The partitional matrix, and this is minus b and then c00d0. B this, you can find the determinant of this three by three. You have your zeros polynomal. You let it be zero, you can find the zeros. You can find the zeros. Now we design the k and this is the key that we have obtained, right? We have obtained. And suppose this is your control law, right? This is a control law, and we want to find the cross cross state equation. You just sub k. Oh. Plus r here into here, then you expand. So this is your co slope state equation. With this k with this k, you can find a minus k, which is this this a minus b k, A minus b k. This is your A matrix croslop B matrix and the C, they are the same, right? So with a croslop state equation. We can also go on now to find a zero polynomial in the cross slope system. But you must use a croslop A, crost Cros matrices, So A minus b k is the closed slope A matrix. So I minus d matrix minus b C and D. This three by three metrics when you find the determinant. You see that the polynomial, the zero polynomial of the plan before cross feedback and plan with cross feedback, they are the same. So they have the same the same zero locations. What I mean? So I'll show you here a schematic of what it means, right? So assume these are the 
original pole location and original zero location of the plant, right? So you do a stake feedback, and you move the pole of the plant to some new location. L e says here. The zeros of the plant, they are not move. They remains the same. They remains the same. All right. The new pool location are there. Zero location, no change. Right? The number of poles in the closed loop system is the same as a number of poles of the plant before feedback. What you're doing the poles of the plant, in this case, is two of them, you move to two new locations. Okay? Okay, look at this numerical example, huh? You are going to apply this state feedback controller to this system. Discuss the and observability of the resulting cross system. So, this whole expression here, you substitute inside here, the whole expression here, substitute in here, and then you have the cro state equation. Cross A cross B matrix. That substitute this whole thing inside here. Then you expand. You have a cross state equation. I can verify coastal A and coastal B matches. Okay? Controllability matrix, D A B. You can see that it is very small, d the determinant, but there is no zero, is small, but no zero, so it's close look, controllable. You don't row it off to zero, and then you say, it is not controllable. The observa matrix, The crost system, you can see the observatory matrix, you can see the terminan is equals to zero. It is not observable. No observable. We have using space. We use the space approach. Substitute this z here. We got the cross slope state equation, and using this cross slope system mattresses, we find that the the clop system is contro controllable, but not observable. No observable. If you view the system now from the transport function approach, right? In the crolope system over here, cross A matrix B matrix, You expand this. So you can see this is the croslo transfer function. Before you apply feedback, for the plan, the transfer function, is that O use that C minus A inverse B A is 
on here. All right. This is your plan. Transfer function. You can see that the poles of the plant at this location here, they are moved to new location. Right? The poles of the plant are moved to new location. But the zeros are not changed. The zeros of the plant and when we feed back, they are not changed. So what happened is one of the poles of the plant has been moved to a new location. That coincide with the zeros of the plant. One of the poles of the plant has moved to the same location as the zeros resulting in pole zero cancellation. In this example. Okay? Okay. So suppose this is the plan. Okay, now, instead of applying this? Instead of this controller there, so the question is this. Do you mean the K one and K two to be avoided to avoid to avoid for the co system to be observable. This is the quest for this example, suppose. Instead of this qu, this is the question. So before you subtra this into here and your cross top A matrix is equals to this. You can work it out. I hope I don't make mistakes. This is your cross loop, A matrix. I sub this into here. Let you. You get this. All right. Then your obser matrix cross. Okay. So based on the cross slope observatory, right, the determinant is given by this. It is zero if your k two is equals to this value, right? You can see that this is exactly the same value as as this guy there, causes the coast system to be unobservable. If you want the coast loop system to be observable, then K two must not be equals to this. What about K one? K one can be any value because it doesn't affect the rank of the observability metric. So you can see the are different ways to present the problem. Okay. Now, we move on and this is the continuous time system. When you discretize it, This is what you get over here, and based on your desired coastal pose, P one, P two, you give Alpha and match it to the coast characteristic polynomial. Alpha. And then you get this. Right? Matching this. So we solve what we did early on in the 
example. So we have two equation to solve. Matching one equation equals to this, another equation equals to this. So two unknown two equation, If the order is high, let's say you have x one, x two, x three, x x five. Five state variable, then you have to find k one, k two, K three, four, k five. I become very tedious, even to solving it simultaneous. But if the state based model is in controllable canonical form, then design k is simpler. Controllable canonical form is one whereby the A and the B has a certain structure, A, zero, one, et c. The last row here, the AI is nothing more than using the characteristic polynomial. Determinant of I minus A. That's a AI, negative values are the entries there. So this is the Space model, if in CCF form, then A minus B k A minus b k, even easy because of b is zero, et c then one. For example, B k multiply out, then you get the last row here are your unknown k one, k two. A minus p K the last row and three, just the negative in minus k one, et cetera, right? So the last row here is very easy to write. So determine of Z I minus this, which is the Alpha z is also very easy to write because they are all zero and one here is in CCF. So the coefficient here, these are the coefficient of your cross characteristic polynomial, all this, right? And your desired cross slope characteristic polynomial will be Span, and then you match. So you can see that your Ki plus one you match one by one. For example, you take the last one, plus K one is Beta n. Beta n, n minus one, et cetera. When you're given P one to P n, okay, you can find you're given your Beta is, when you're given P one, P two, like this, like this, when you're given, then this one is no. Okay. And your AI is also given or you don't, right? So these are your AI. The AI, you know, BI, the Beta I, you know, you can you can calculate K one, K two, et cetera. When the state space model is in CCF form, then you calculate K one, K two, K three, very easy. Very easy. That's why we 
study CCF form. In Lecture two. Now, in general, a state space model need not be represented in CCF form. In general. So what do we do? We make use of the comans formula was derived by coms in so many years ago. For those who are interested to see the derivation, you can refer to my reference number three, by stroma by stro. You can have a look. But here we used the result. We use the result. With the desired cs loop pose, P one, P two, P three, et cetera skiven, so you can find Alpha Alpha C z. With Alpha C, you can find Alpha C A. This is where matrix A now is an argument in this characteristic polynomal. This is a formula. T. Just now, we use matching the two polynomial, and then you solve two subutneous equation or k one and k two. And let's call it method one. Now we another method. This method one and two is just by reference only. So that may be discussed. Here, we will use the comas formula. Given the p placement problem, you can either use this method and you solve two equation simultaneously, or you may prefer to use this formula Am formula. You need to find the inverse of the controlling matrix and Alpha CA. Let me look at one example later on. Whichever method you use answer is the same. If you get a different answer, you check some way it's not correct. There are more other methods available. You know, I just present only two. For those who are interested, if you look up the book, they discuss other methods. But for the given problem, the K is the same. Whichever method you use. Okay. Now we solve the earlier problem using a combined formula. Okay? The other problem using chamans formula. This is based on the desired P one, P two, I can Alpha C. Alpha C is a poom matrix in A. You replace Z with A. Square become a square, d or A, become A. Now, the last term there, you must add the identity matrix there of the two in this example. Otherwise, you cannot add a scaler to a matrix. Incorrect. You must add this I two there. Don't forget. Replace that with A 
in the Alpha C s for Alpha C A. The last term, we have the identity matrix. Okay, you expand this. This is your answer. This is Alpha C A. Okay. And the next thing you'll find is the controllability matrix. So this is a B, and then A, B, find the inverse. This is a inverse. Okay. So we use comas formula. You can see the answer is the same, right? Previously, we use matching the polynomial soft two equation simultaneously, right? So now we use this formula. If you want to use this formula in your exam, Or quiz. I'm not saying you come out. Okay? You must remember yourself because there's no formula sheet provided in the exam or quiz. Only the transformable, a plus transform table, Okay. So We in the state feedback or pole placement problem, we designed the key so that the close poles are at some desired location, right? Right? And of course, you will need or want the crock slope pose to be within the uni circle. You want to have stable crock slope poles, right within the uni circle in the Zac plane, right? So if this o case, then your crock slope system is stable and your X K goes to zero, S K goes to infinity for a certain given initial state. The So you want the closer pose to be all within that you disagree, okay? Now, if all the coastal poles at the origin. If all the coastal poles, then you have this phenomena. Not only of the coastal system is stable. You have a phenomena where You initial state is somewhere here, it will goes to zero in that most end sampling period. You start somewhere there, it does go to zero in that most end sampling period. This type of control is called date be control. It's a phenomena of discrete time system. Continuing time system. You don't see this. When we say design a date peak controller, it means that your desired coastal par, or your P one, P two, P three, et cetera, they are all at the origin is understood. They be controller. All the ps desired pose are the origin. If you're asked to design a controller, a DB controller, 
then all your desired coastal pose, D origin. To achieve DP control such that all the coastal pole the origin, then the Dp controller is given by this. This is this is your method one. Z n. Slide 23. All the cos loopholes are at the origin, P one, P two, et cetera. They are all zero. You Alphas would be times that times that times that Z p n only because all these are at the origin zero. Alpha is just p n. Just this do. And you equate this with your Alpha, and then you can solve. F k one, k two. If you want to use Acoma formula, then your Alpha C A would be just a pow n because Alpha C is that to pow n. So Alpha C A is just this. This inside here, you can use this formula or use this. Okay? So if the question say, desire a debut Controller is understood that all your desire close to polls are the original. Now, the next poll slide, just want to show you that when all the cost pools are the origin, then you get DP control. So just for your info, don't worry. I will ask you to reproduce all the de revision here. Just something we have discussed controllable canonical form, all those. And, Suppose the system controllable system, you transform it to CCF form, so your A and B are in CCF form, then your control law minus kx is equals to p because W is p. Substitute inside here. This is your croslo state equation. If you want to have DP control or the cros poles the origin. Close to Posa. Alpha is the power n. Early on, we have a discussion where if the state space border is in CCF form, CCF form, then your KI easy to compute. Given by this, you can check slide 40. But because Alpha see that is that a power n, Then your Beta is they are all zero. You KI is just the negative of the AIs, very easy. I that, you can obtain the crosslo A matrix. This is this. This is a B C, AC, this is in CCF form, this is a KP. The controller is a negative of the AI. Then you expand this, and then you have a matrix like this. A matrix, which has this structure has this property that the n 
power of it equals to zero. I give you here a numerical example three by three. A matrix three by three of this structure. The third power is a zero matrix, new potent matrix. The n power of this will be the zero matrix. T. In terms of the original state, In terms of the original state, we have ACP ver a P. A, you get B, substitute back into here. You expand this, the n power of this is the zero matrix. For a certain initial state, start from somewhere, it goes to zero in print instance. When all the cross poles are at the origin. We have they beat control. Okay? We have they beat control. Double integrator, lecture one, I went through the U. It's a state space, and we discretize it. We have this. Determine the controller k for dep control. Dp control meaning or the cls poles origin. After that, determine u0u1 for various sling period t. So we're going to use the cab formula. You one dep control A C A is a p of n. In this case, n is two, so a squ you find the inverse of the controlling metrics, A and B is given. So you have this. All right. With that, uk is minus kk, u zero is minus k x zero, u one is minus k x one. What about x one, x one is in 4.3, you can have x one equals to this. X one, subtitu inside here, pre multiplied by k, you get u one, u zero. The dep controller, you calculated is this one here. Deptro, u zero is this, u one is this. You can see that depending on the value of the sampling period t, zero u one takes up different values as shown in this table here. T is two, let's say, and the U zero, u one is so in terms of the magnitude. T is 0.5, the magnitude is higher now, right? Which is obvious, because in dept control, all right, you start of initial state here, it goes to zero in a most end number of sampling period. You want to go to zero very fast. So your samp period small. That means you must provide. More effort, right? If the assembling period is big. You don't need that much effort as before. T one need to go to zero faster. In other 
words, the smaller the value of t, The larger the value of UK or vice versa. It's important to choose the sampling period carefully when using debt control. You must of course satisfy the send sampling criteria to avoid leasing first. Then you try to keep the magnitude within accept values. One more example here is this is just info the three by three. But because it is in CCA form, you can see the calculation, even though it's three by three, is quite easy. You can see A minus b k determinant minus the A minus B k is over here. Then this give the coefficient of the characteristic polynomial, Alpha, or this Alpha cz is that a p three because you want to have a dated controller. So that a part three. Here basically use meto one. You match the polynomial. You can see you match the polynomial offset to zero. You go no other term here, and you can find k one, k2k3 very easily. Because it's in CCF form. With this k, you want to show that the response is indeed the p. We substitute this into the state equation. You close to A matrix A minus k is this. With initial state, any, any initial state, you can find x 1x2x3. Arbitary, x one is this times x zero, and x one is here, substitute into, and two is he substitute into here, then you can see that response is indeed. You start off bitly ABC somewhere, it goes to zero. So you have tap response. And after that, thereafter, you mean that zero. Okay. So that's the end of my lecture three. Your quiz the scope will be until until here. Until here. My pass on ture one, two, and three. Por form part, he will take care of his own quiz, is on the fifth October. That means next week is a recise break. So have a break study for your quiz. No come, even though I mentioned to student ne recess break, don't come but students still come in the recess break. So next week, don't come. Then maybe meet again on the fifth, please go back to LT two A. No, don't come here. The quiz is in LT two a. All right. O Give more announcement on you learn 
today or tomorrow, basically, this is what it is. I will start the lecture at 6:30 lecture four, when we meet. I will discuss on observer system. The different types of observers estimator. And then around 8:00, stop for a break, okay? You have a break and and then gather back together in LT two a for the quiz. All right. So the quiz is LD two a. No here, please. Okay. It's 45 minute pen and paper. No MC QR. You have to calculate, you know, For example, determine the dp controller example on, I say, come on. I'll give this example throughout. You must calculate. You can use meto one or meto two up to you. You're going to use Akama formula, you must remember those formula. You must remember the contro metric and all the stuff. So it's close book, but the transform table will be provided plus transform table. 15%, bring your own calculator. So I will give more details such as sitting arrangement, et cetera, on the announced. Okay, So I end here now. Thank you for coming. The Many time or anybody who got any question, I'll be happy to answer. 