Good  evening,  class. So  we  will  continue  the  lectures on  kinematics  of  robot  manipulators. He,  let  us  review the  concept  first  before  we  move  on. For  today's  lectures  on  inverse  kinematics. He  recall  that  we  have  learned  how to  model  the  forward  kinematics  of robot  systems  so  that  we homogeneous  transformation  metrics  that give  us  the  position  and orientations  of  the  N for  with  respect  to  the  base  brim. For  positions  is  x y  z  of  the  N  factor with  respect  to  the  base  brim. This  is  basically  a  three  dimensional  vector, which  means  that  you  can just  put  it  into  a  vector  form. To  represent  the  two  configuration  vectors for  solving  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. But  however,  the  orientation  matrix, which  is  the  rotational  transformations of  the  mobile  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  frame is  three  times  three  matrix, and  it  can  be  partitioned  into  three  columns, with  the  physical  meaning represented  in  this  diagram. R  three,  the  last  column represent  the  approach  factor. R  two  represent  the  sliding  vector. That  means  the  opening  and closing  directions  of  your  gripper, and  r  one  basically  is  per  pencular to  R  two  and  R three  according  to  right  hand  rules. Therefore,  we  can  see  from  here that  if  we  take  the  approach  vector, it  represents  part  of  the orientation  in  the  sense that  you  can  make the  approach  for  approach  and  object, so  as  to  pick  it  up  and it  is  three  dimensional. This  means  that  if  you  put  it into  a  vector  form, it  represent  the  orientation, but  something  is  missing because  in  order  to  pick  up  the  object, not  only  that  you  must  approach  the  object, but  you  must  also  be  able to  align  the  gripper. Align  the  gripper,  that means  that  you  need  to  control this  sliding  vector  so  that it  will  align  with  the  flat  surface. For  example,  if  you  have  an  object  here, The  gripper  need  to  align  with the  flat  surface  so  as  to  pick  it  up. Which  basically  means  that  we need  to  be  able  to  rotate  r  two. To  rotate  r  two,  basically, we  can  use  this  row  angles  of the  factors  so  that we  have  positions  approach  and  the  role. But  if  you  put  them  together, it  is  still  not  a  minimum  representation because  in  three  dimensional  space, we  have  six  degree  of  freedom, three  for  position,  translations, and  three  for  orientation. Rotations  with  respect  to  x  y  z. The  two  configuration  method  is  just to  compat  this  row  angle. Into  a  three  dimensional  space by  observing  the  idea that  if  you  have  a  vector  and you  multiply  by  a  positive  scalar, it  does  not  change  the directions  of  the  vector. Therefore,  we  put an  exponential  function  because exponential  function  is  always  positive regardless  of  whether  Q  n is  positive  or  negative. This  will  enable  us  to  encode this  Q  N  into the  magnitude  of  this  orientation  vector. This  was  the  idea  that  we  have gone  through  in  the  last  lectures. Now,  The  purpose  of putting  it  into  a  two configuration  form  is  actually  to derive  the  four  kinematic  model as  a  six  dimensional  vector so  as  to  solve  the  inverse  kinematic  problem. Meaning  that  suppose  that  we put  it  into  a  two  configuration  form. Then  we  can  specify the  positions  of  the  object. For  example,  if  this  object  is located  at  a  certain  positions, then  we  can  try  to  find  out what  will  be  the  joint  angle  or joint  configurations  of  this  robot  in  order to  pick  up  this  object and  grabs  it  with  a  certain  orientation. That  means  that  you  need  to  find the  solutions  of this  forward  kinematics  equation. What  is  the  queue?  So  that  given  x, you'll  be  able  to  find  Q. As  you  can  see,  forward  kinematics basically  is  the  other  way  round. It  says  that  given  Q  given  the  joint  angle, You  have  this  model  to  calculate the  position  and  the orientation  of  the  n  factor. But  in  a  robot  pas, what  we  want  is  a  reverse  because robot  is  a  low  level  machine. We  need  to  tell  the  robot  exactly, what  are  the  joint  angle  one, what  is  join  two,  three, and  so  on  so  that  you'll be  able  to  pick  up  this  object. Which  means  that  we  need  to solve  the  inverse  kinematic  problem. Therefore,  the  purpose  of  driving the  four  kinematics  equations  is actually  to  solve the  inverse  kinematic  problem. So  that  given  any  task here  you  can  see  that  x  is  your  task, given  the  positions  of the  object  that  you  want  to  pick  it  up, given  the  orientations, that  you  wish the  manipulators  to  pick  up  the  object. That  means  that  what  is the  direction  you  want  to  approach  it? Vertically  downward,  or  it should  be  approached  at  a  certain  directions, and  what  would  be  the  rotational  angle, or  what  would  be  the  sliding  vector so  as  to  accomplish  the  task? In  this  case,  it  involves  finding the  joint  configurations  by solving  the  inverse  kinematic  problem. Just  a  review  of all  the  concepts  that  we  have  learned  so  far. Last  week,  at  the  end  of  lectures, I  went  through  this  example in  Harry,  and  I  didn't  finish  it. Today,  I'm  going  to  repeat  it  again  and complete  this  example  before we  move  on  to  the  last  example. Here  in  this  example  3.1, we  have  a  robot  with  only  five  models, five  degree  of  freedom. That  means  that  you  cannot  realize certain  orientation. Because  in  order  to  realize  any  orientation, any  position,  you  need  to have  at  least  six  motels, six  degree  of  freedom. Suppose  that  you  have  less  than  that. Then  in  some  cases, you  may  not  be  able to  realize  the  orientation. But  you  can  plan  your  work  cell properly  as  we'll  see  in some  examples  later  on. Okay.  Here,  we  will  start  by  expressing the  forward  kinematics  models that  we  have  obtained  in homogeneous  transformation  metric  form into  a  six  dimensional  vector. And  as  you  can  see  from  here, the  position  is  straightforward. The  position,  you  just put  it  as  the  first  three. Elements  of  your  two  configuration  vector because  position  itself  is  three  dimensional. But  orientation  will  consist  of  three  vector, r  one,  r  two,  and  r  three. Therefore,  two  thirds  of the  information  is  redundant because  the  minimum  representations of  orientation  is  also  three  dimensional. One  way  is  that  we  take out  the  approach  vector  only. If  you  take  out  the  approach  vectors, and  then  you  put  it  into the  two  configuration  form. Together  with  your  position  vector, it  will  be  a  six  dimensional  vector. However,  this  vector  does  not give  your  rotations  of your,  the  sliding  directions. In  order  to  achieve  that,  we  use and  code  as  the  magnitude of  the  approach  vector. And  we  use  a  positive  functions  of  Q  N, exponential  function  so  that you  will  not  change  the  approach  direction, and  the  magnitude  will  give  you basically  the  Q  N.  This  is just  one  way  to  give the  minimum  representations of  the  orientation. The  purpose  of  expressing this  forward  kinematics  equation  into this  form  is  actually  to solve  the  inverse  kinematic  problem, which  means  that  now  you  can start  to  relate  it  to  the  one,  two, three,  four,  five,  six,  There Six  of  them.  Here,  we  say that  given  a  desired  position and  orientations, that  means  given  the  toss. What  are  the  joint  angle? What  are  the  joint  angle  one,  two, three,  four,  five  in  this  case? So  that  you  can  accomplish  this  ts. I  say  again  given  the  desired  position, where  the  object  is  located, given  the  desired  orientation, how  you  want  to  pick  up  the  object, or  how  you  want  to  place  the  object. What  is  what  are  the  joint  angles,  q45? In  this  case,  only  five  degree  of  rhythm. To  accomplish  this  task. Notice  that  this  can be  changes  quite  frequently because  your  task  at one  time  is  at  this  location. Another  time,  you  may  want  to  pick up  something  at  another  location. You  need  something  very  fast to  calculate  this  inverse  kinematics. That  means  that  analytic  form. Given  any  position,  any  orientation, I  can  quickly  calculate the  corresponding  joint  angles to  achieve  this  task. The  solving  of the  inverse  kinematics  problems is  not  so  systematic. Unlike  forward  kinematics, even  though  it  is  quite  tedious, but  it  is  systematic, that  means  you  assign  DH  coordinate, assign  coordinates  according  to  DH  algorithm. Then  you  identified the  four  kinematic  parameters. Then  you  use  the  kinematic  parameters  to  find the  transformation  matrixes, multiply  them  together. You  can  get  that.  But  inverse  kinematics, there's  no  systematic  way,  no  fixed  rule. The  only  thing  we  know  is that  the  four  kinematics  model  of robot  manipulators  are  usually trigometric  functions,  sine  and  cosine. As  you  can  see,  there  are many  consisting  of  sine  cosine, which  means  that  you  need  to  apply those  mathematics  in  trigonometris, to  solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. Typically,  I  will  say  that you  just  watch  out  for  a  few  things. Firstly,  sometimes  you can  combine  the  equations by  dividing  sine  by  cosine  to  form  tangent. Also,  sometimes  you  can  square  the  cosine and  square  the  sine  and added  to  simplify  into  one. Cosine  squared  plus  sine squared  is  equal  to  one. Typically  is  these  two  equations. Of  course,  you  also  have  to  remember, how  do  you  expend  cosine  x plus  minus  y,  and  sine. Plus  minus  y.  This  is  something everybody  learned  actually before  universities. You  just  have  to  revise all  these  trigonometric  formulas and  then  apply this  to  your  inverse  kinematics  problems by  looking  at  the  equation  carefully. You  start  by  observing the  equations  carefully. As  I  said,  the  objective  is  to find  the  job  configurations  given any  positions  of  the  object and  the  corresponding  originations to  pick  it  up. Now,  let  us  look  at this  six  equation  carefully, starting  from  the  first  two. For  the  first  two  equations, even  though  they  look  very  complex, but  if  you  observe  them  carefully, everything  in  the  bracket  are  the  same. Everything  in  the  bracket  are  the  same. The  difference  is  first extreme  left  you  have  cosine. Second  equation,  you  have  sine. Therefore,  if  you  divide  this  two  equation, use  sine  over  cosine, because  this  will  give  you  tangent. If  you  divide  equation  two  by  equation  one, you  can  cancel  the  common  term. As  a  result,  you  get  only sine  d  one  divided  by  cosine  dal  one, which  means  that  you  get  tangent  dt  one. Tangent  Q  one  or  tangent  dt one.  This  basically  means  what? Q1k  is  tangent  of  W  2/1. This  is  the  first  inverse  kinematic  equation. Given  two  and  W  one,  what  is  w21? Actually  is  the  x  and  y,  desired  position. That  means  that  given  the  location  of the  object  in  x  axis  and  y  axis, you  can  first  calculate rotational  angle  joint  one. Right?  And  in  solving the  inverse  kinematics  problem, one  thing  that  you  have  to bear  in  mind  is  that eventually  you'll  write this  algorithm  in  a  program, to  let  user  use  it. After  you  solve  it  on  paper, we  need  to  program  it  in the  robot  controller  program. In  this  case,  you'll  know that  suppose  that  you  run  the  program, when  you  execute  this  command,  subsequently, subsequently  after  this, Q  one  is  already  calculated. Which  means  that  now after  this  equation  is  a  known  joint  angle. Which  means  that  you  need to  take  advantage  of this  known  joint  angles  to  proceed to  calculate  the  other  angles. In  this  case,  will  be  45. Next,  we  will  proceed  to  first soft  for  Q  plus  three  plus  four. The  reason  is  this. If  we  look  at  the  last  three  equation  now, last  three  equation,  and we  notice  that  Q  is  already  known. The  only  unknown  is  sine in  prosecutor  prosecute  four. Which  means  that  it  may  be  possible  to isolate  prosecutor  prosecute  four  first, Because  Q  one  is  already  known. This  three  equations, you  can  see  the  properties, that  the  first  two  equations are  in  terms  of  sine  234. One  with  cosine  one, the  other  one  with  sine  Q  one. While  the  last  equations  is  cosine  234. If  you  look  at  this  equations, you  can  see  that  because  the  first two  are  different  by  sine  and  cosine. Maybe  I  can  multiply  it by  cosine  one  on  both  sides. Both  side  by  cosine  one. This  will  give  you  a  C  one  squared. Equation  two,  can  be  multiplied  by  sine  one, and  that  will  give  me  sine  one  square. Why  do  I  do  this  is  that. Remember,  cosine  squared  plus sine  square  is  equal  to  one. As  a  result,  if  you  add  up  this  two  equation, add  up  this  two  equation, you'll  give  you  only this  term  with  this  term. Because  sine  squared  plus cosine  squared  is  equal  to  one. This  basically  means  that  if  I multiply  the  four  by  C  one  on  both  side, if  I  multiply  the  five  by  S  one  on  both  side, Because  of  the  fact  that  cosine squared  plus  sine  squared  is  equal  to  one, Basin  squared  plus  contin squared  plus  sine  square  is  equal  to  one. Therefore,  I  will  get  only  s234. Next,  if  you  compare this  equation  with  this  one, The  only  difference  is  that one  is  sine  one  is  cosigned. One  is  sine  one  is  cosine. Which  means  that  you  should use  the  other  property, sine  divided  by  cosine,  give  you  tangent. Next,  I  will  invert  the  sine  first. That  means  that  you  multiply both  sides  by  negative, then  you  divide  by  the  last  equation  six. Also  invert  the  sine  first. The  purpose  here  you  can  see  that  is to  cancel  Q  five. You  cancel  a  Q  five, so  that  you  can  get  tangent. P  three,  pro  four. Notice  that  everything  on this  side  is  already  known. Everything  on  this  side  is already  known  because  y? One,  you  have  solved the  inverse  kinematic  problem. The  first  inverse  kinematics  equation, over  here. This  is  the  first  inverse  kinematic  problem. When  you  reach  this  stage, this  is  already  known. If  it's  already  know,  then  you can  actually  calculate  plus  three  plus  four, by  taking  the  g  of  this. Q34  will  be  the  Tengin  of this  and  because  Q  one  is  known, you  can  calculate  sine  and  cosine. Cosine  Q  one  is  sine  Q  one. The  456  user  input, given  the  123456,  calculate  d4f. This  is  the  next  inverse  kinematics  equation. Given  the  456,  calculate, Q  two  plus  q  plus  Q  four  together. But  we  do  not  know  what  is  Q, what  is  Q  plus  q  four? We  only  know  the  sum  of  them  at  this  stage. We  need  to  proceed  further  to solve  for  the  remaining  variables. At  this  stage,  it  is  good to  take  a  look  at  the  equations  and identify  what  are  the  known  parameters now  and  what  are  the  unknown  parameters? Here,  I  underline all  the  known  parameters  by  blue. Because  one  is  known. Q  prosecutor  prosecute  four  is  known. Therefore,  sine  and  cosine. Q  prosecutor,  prosecute  four, they  are  all  all  known. That  means  can  be  calculated. So  called  sine  Q  one, sine  Q  one  is  also  known. Similarly,  over  here,  these  are all  the  known  parameters. D  one,  D  and  A  are  the  kinematic  parameters. They  are  also  known. C  Kinematic  parameters  are  also  known. That  means  that  here, I  would  be  able to  focus  on  this  three  equation. The  idea  is  that  I  want  to  express the  unknown  terms  in  terms  of  the  known  term. You  want  to  express  the  unknown  term in  terms  of  the  known  term. This  is  the  main  idea. Let's  start  from  the  first  two  equation. Again,  you  can  notice  that  they  are  just different  by  sine  and  cosine. Different  by  sine  and  cosine. This  basically  means  that  if  I multiply  the  first  equation  by  cosine  one, and  then  multiply  the  second equation  by  sine  one. Again,  I  will  be  able  to get  cosine  squared  and  sine  squared. After  you  multiply  by  sine  cosine. The  purpose  is  that  I  can  then  add  them  up. And  use  cosine  square per  sine  square  is  equal  to one  to  combine these  two  equation  into  just  one. Just  one  equation.  How  does  it look  like?  Here  it  will  look  like  this. You  multiply  first  equation  by  C  one, second  equation  by  S  one, and  then  you  add  them  up. Cosine  square  per  sine  square is  equal  to  one. Then  you  can  combine  them  into  one  equation. After  that,  I  will  move  this  non  term. These  are  all  the  known  term to  the  other  side  of  the  equation. I  can  get  this  equation  over  here. Left  hand  side  will  be all  the  joint  angles which  are  unknown  at  this  stage. Right  hand  side  are  those terms  that  can  be  calc calculated  by the  previous  inverse  kinematics  equation. Next,  similarly,  I  can also  move  all  the  unknown. Or  the  known,  sorry,  to the  other  side  of  the  equation, and  then  invert  the  si. I  can  get  the  next  equation. Again,  all  the  known  terms are  moved  to  the  right  hand  side. Left  hand  side  are  all  the  unknown  terms. Let's  call  this  V  one.  Let's  call  this  B  two. In  your  program  normally, you  need  to  define  something, variables  to  calculate  that  in  this  case, I  can  calculate  all  these  terms called  B  one  by  using, plus  three  plus  plus  all  the kinematics  parameters and  all  the  user  inputs. The  B  one,  two, three,  three  of  them. Next.  This  basically explain  these  two  equation. By  the  way,  I've  uploaded  this  in the  NT  learn  because some  students  say  that they  want  to  look  at  it, but  actually,  you  can  just  go  to  the  video and  capture  a  screen  scot  if  you  want. But  anyway,  I  have  uploaded  them. Basically,  this  gives  you  two  equations, correct,  which is  A  equation  A  and  equation  B. A  and  B,  equation  A  and  B  and B  one  and  B  two  are  known. That  means  when  you  write  the  program, you  have  this  statement  now,  B  one, B  two  can  be  calculated  based on  all  this  equation. Next,  we  look  at  equation  A  and  equation  B. Then  we  observe  that. One  is  cosine.  The  other  one  is  sine. They  are  only  different  by  sine  and  cosine. This  basically  means  that  maybe  I can  try  to  take  square  of  the  equation, square  of  the  equation,  y, then  you  will  get  cosine  squared. If  you  square  the  other  equation, you'll  get  sine  squared. Again,  sine  squared  plus  cosine squared,  is  equal  to  one. Then  you  may  be  able  to simplify  some  of  the  terms  inside. Actually,  this  involves  a  lot  of experience  and  true  trial  narrows. After  some  times,  we  will  see some  similarity  in  some  of the  kinematics  equation  naturally. I  say  again,  we  square  it  y because  equation  A  consists  of  sine. Equation  B  consists  of  sine. I  should  square  them  so that  when  I  add  them  up, sine  square  plus  cosine  square is  equal  to  one, I  can  simplify  a  lot  of  the  term. This  is  the  square  of  the  first  equation. This  is  the  square  of  the  second  equation, and  here  we  can  see  that this  sine  square  plus cosine  square  is  equal  to  one. Sine  square  plus  cosine square  is  equal  to  one, which  means  that  if  I add  up  the  two  equation. Then  I'll  be  able  to  get  something  like  this. Because  Q  two  square  pine Q  two  squared  is  equal  to  one. Therefore,  the  first  two  terms  over here,  added  up  to  be  this. This  two  term  added  up  to  be  this. The  last  two  term,  there  is a  common  term,  you  can  take  it  out. The  remaining  term  will  be coins  Q  two  plus  Q  three  plus  sine, sine  two  plus  Q  three. At  one  grant,  it  looks  like  it become  quite  complicated,  correct. But  however,  when  you see  this  kind  of  equation, cosine  cosine  sine  sine, it  should  remind  you  of a  very  familiar  formula, cosine,  cosine,  sine, sine,  and  here  there's  a  plus, meaning  that  it  should  be  cosine  x  minus  y. Then  the  rest  is  very  simple. Either  of  them  either them  can  be  sine  or  cosine. This  means  cosine,  Q  two. This  means  cosine  Q  two  plus  Q  three. Either  of  them  can  be  x  or  y. It  depends  on  which  one  you  want  to  call  x, which  one  you  want  to  call  y. Similarly  here,  you  have  sine  Q  two  and then  sine  Q  two  plus  Q  three. Which  basically  means  that  if you  call  this  x,  if  you  call  this  y, then  you  will  get  what  Q  two minus  two  plus  q  three,  Correct? Which  is  what  negative  Q  three. Negative  Q  three  is  still  Q  three, I  still  cosine  Q  three. This  is  property  of  sine. Now,  you  may  also  define  it  this  way. You  may  going  to  call  it  y is  x,  no  difference. And  in  this  case, will  be  plus  minus. So  you  get  three  directly. In  either  case,  you  will  get. That  means  that  this  thing is  simplified  to  Q  three. Which  basically  explains  the  last  equation in  this  s  light,  on  the  left. That  means  that  by  squaring equation  A  and  B  and  add  them  up and  make  use  of sine  square  plus  for  sine squared  is  equal  to  one. I  can  then  get  one  equation  with  Q. Q.  C  three  is  cosine  Q  three. Next,  if  I  move this  to  this  side  of  the  equation, and  then  divide  by  2a2a3, I  get  cosine  Q  three. Which  explain  this  last  equation, cosine  Q  three  will  be  equal to  b  one  square  plus  P  two  square. This  is  the  notation  for  B one  square  plus  b  two  square  minus a  square  minus  minus a  two  square  minus a  three  square  divided  by  2a2a3, and  then  take  art  cosine. This  just  rearranging  this  equation  to get  cosine  Q  three  and  then  take  art  cosign. When  you  take  art  cosign,  be  careful, just  now,  I  say  that  whether  it  is Negative  Q  three  or  positive  Q  three, both  you  get  cosine  Q. Which  means  that  there  are  actually two  solutions  when  you  take  t  cosine. One  will  be  positive,  one  will  be  negative. This  is  an  example  to  let  you  know  that the  solutions  of  the  inverse abatics  is  not  unique. Sometimes  you  have  multiple  solutions. What  you  need  to  do  is  just  to  choose  one  of them,  and  then  proceed. This  basically  give  us  Q. Always  mark  down,  what  is  known, Q  one  is  known,  plus three  plus  Q  four  is  known, and  now  Q  is  also calculated  from  this inverse  kinematics  equation. Which  means  that  we  can now  proceed  to  look  at  the  equation  again, equation  A  and  B. We  know  that  Q  three  is known.  Three  is  known. However,  we  do  not  know  cosine  plus  Q  three. Even  though  is  known, but  we  do  not  know  what  is cosine  plus  three  and we  do  not  know  what  is  d  two. We  have  a  problem  because  this, which  is  known  is  inside  the  two  terms. Inside  the  two  terms,  this  term is  sine  plus  three. Is  known.  But  it  is  inside  this  term. In  order  to  isolate  it, you  can  expand  it,  right? Because  we  know  that  cosine  plus  Q three  is  equal  to  cosine, cosine  three  minus  sine  two  minus  Q  three. Similarly,  sine  plus  Q  three. Is  equal  to  Cinco  sine  plus  cosine  sine. That  means  that  I  can  expand  it. This  explain  this  equation  here. You  just  expands  sine  sine, cinco,  cosine  sine.  Just  expand  them. The  purpose  is  that  after  you  expand  them, then  you  can  cine  and  sine.  Here  is  inside. You  cannot  calculate  anything, even  though  you  know  Q  three. After  you  expand  them,  you  can  see that  you  can  calculate  cosine  Q  three, you  can  calculate  sine  Q  three, I  can  calculate  cosine  Q  three, and  you  can  calculate  sine  three. This  basically  means  that  everything  that I  underline  in  rate  in  this  equation, which  is  a  result  of expanding  from  this  equation, are  known,  this  is  known. This  is  known.  This  is  known, this  is  also  known,  and  this  is  not  known. This  is  also  not  known. Similarly,  this  is  s  these  are  not  known. But  however,  notice  that you  have  two  unknowns, C  two  and  S  two, and  you  have  two  equation,  correct? If  you  have  two  unknown  two  equations, you  can  solve  it. After  solving  this,  this  is  what  you  get. Don't  be  confused  by  these  two  equations. It's  something  everybody  know because  it's  something  like  that. B  one  is  equal  to  k1x  minus  k2y. This  is  my  k  one,  this  is  my  x. This  is  basically  K  two, and  I  call  this  y. Then  similarly,  you  have  another  equation, B  two  is  equal  to  same  coefficient. You  can  see  actually  is very  easy,  same  coefficient, y,  plus  k  two.  X. Everybody  can  solve  for  x  and  y, if  you  put  it  into  this  form. If  you  can  solve  this  linear  equation, definitely  you  can  solve  this  two. Two.  This  will  be  your  x, and  this  will  be  all  y, where  you  solve  it  in  terms of  K  one  and  K  two, which  are  known  because  you  have expanded  sine  and  cosine  Q  two  plus  three, that  everything  which  I underline  here  all  known. That  means  k  one  and  k  two  are  known. B  one,  B  two  also  known. The  only  unknowns  are  x  and  y, which  can  be  obtained by  solving  two  equations  with  two  unknowns. After  you  obtain  this  two  equation, you  need  to  combine  them  together, B  sine  cosine  do not  give  you  the  quadrant  information  alone. That  means  if  you  solve  this  one alone  and  if  you  solve this  one  alone  because  sine  cosine, may  have  the  same  solutions. For  the  same  x, for  example,  This  basically means  that  you  should  not  use  one  of  them. Only.  The  idea  is  that  we  combine  them. How  do  we  combine  them?  You  do this  sine  two  divided  by  sine  two. That  means  this  divided  by  this. And  the  denominator  is  the  same.  Correct? So  you  cancel  out  and this  explain  the  last  equation because  sine  divided  by cosine  give  you  tangent. Tangent  two.  Then  you  take  a  tangent.  To  get. Let  us  recall  or  track  what  is  known at  this  stage,  calculated. P  four  calc,  calculated,  also  calculated. Now,  you  need  not  solve  for more  because  you  have  the  of  them. So  it's  just  minus  minus. You  can  get.  This  is the  next  equations  to  get. Which  means  that  we  have  solve  ir  four. D  four  are  all  known. Now,  the  only  unknown  is  five. Q  five,  the  last  angle, the  roll  angle,  is  very  easy  to  solve, because  we  know  that  five  is  actually the  magnitude  included  in the  magnitude  of  the  approach  vector. Okay  actually  approach  vector, remember  that  is  a  unit  vector. That  means  that  the  magnitude is  always  equal  to  one. Is  a  unit  vector,  correct? Representing  the  mobile  frame. If  you  look  at the  last  three  vectors,  indeed, If  you  square  four, five,  six,  and  add  that, this  means  the  square of  the  magnitude,  correct? Square  of  the  magnitude  of the  three  dimensional  vector. Then  because  sine  square plus  or  sine  square  is  equal  to  one, it  is  quite  easy  to  see. You  square  this  two,  add, and  then  c  one  square  plus S  one  square  is  equal  to  one. You  get  s234  square,  correct. Then  after  that,  you  square  this  one. You  add  another  time.  E  combined  into  one. That  means  that,  e  be  one. All  these  will  be  square  also. Which  basically  means  that  your  magnitude  of your  orientation  vector  is actually  containing  the  row  angle. And  this  is  r  three. This  r  three.  The  magnitude  of  r  three, that  means  this  square  root is  always  equal  to  one. Square  root  of  this.  Next,  we  take the  square  root  of  this  term. Then  invert  this  equation,  you  get  Q. Q  i. This  is  the  last  inverse s  chinematic  equation. Is  quite  standard, always  in  this  form  because it  is  e  cir  of  Q  Q  n  divided  by  Pi, is  the  magnitude  of of  the  orientation  vector. This  is  basically  an  example of  inverse  kinematics  problem. And  as  I  said, there's  no  systematic  way  to  solve  this. It  has  to  be  based  on  observations  and the  applications  of mathematics  in  particular  trigromtr. So  it  has  to  solve the  inverse  kinematics  problem. But  after  you  solve  for  a  while, you  can  see  some  similarity in  some  of  the  equation. For  example,  If  you have  gone  through  this  examples, if  you  go  through  the  last  examples of  inverse  schematics, you'll  see  something  very  similar. This  is  the  two  configuration  vectors of  the  four  axis  scar  robot. That  means  that  it  has  only  four  joints. Q  one,  Q  two,  revues. D  three  prismatic,  I  can  extend  up  and  down, and  this  is  the  row  angle. Q  four  is  a  row  angle. Because  it  has  only  four  degree  of  freedom, notice  that  you  cannot specify  some  orientation. It  has  to  be  fixed  at  zero because  we  have  only  four  degree  of  freedom. Okay.  And  on  the  only  the  W  six, that  means  Q  four  can  be  controlled. I  orientation,  you  can  only rotate  Q  four,  nothing  else. Can  only  rotate  Q  four to  rotate  your  any  factors. This  is  the  limitation. Which  means  that  when you  design  your  work  cell, you  must  place  the  part  properly so  that  it  can  be  picked  up. If  you  do  not  place  it  properly, you  can't  pick  up  some  parts at  some  orientation. This  is  the  forward  kinematics  equation in  two  configuration  form. The  first  is  other  the  position and  the  last  three  represent  the  orientation. The  approach  vector  multiply  by the  row  angles  encoded in  the  exponential  function. For  this  rowbot,  remember, it's  always  pointing  vertically  downward. The  approach  vector  was zero,  zero,  negative  one. You  can  refer  to  the  previous  example. This  is  basically the  two  congregation  vector, and  we  start  by  looking at  equation  one  and  equation  two. Is  very  similar  to  the  previous  example. Remember  the  one  with  A  one  A  two  or  b1b2, three,  b1b2.  Very  similar. Except  that  this  is  minus  one  minus  two means  cosine  Q  one  minus  Q  two, S  one  minus  two  is  sine, Q  one  minus  Q  two. Other  than  that  is  exactly  the  same. That  means  that  one  first  equation consists  of  sine. The  second  equation  consists  of, first  equation  consists  of  cosine, second  equation  consists  of  sine. That  basically  means  that  I should  again  try  this,  correct? If  I  square  the  first  equation, I'll  get  cosine  squared. If  I  square  the  second  equation, I'll  get  sine  squared. Because  if  you  square  them  and  them, Using  cosine  squared  of size  squared  is  equal  to  one. Some  of  the  terms  can  be  simplified. Because  cosine  squared  of size  squared  is  equal  to  one. The  coupling  term  Then will  be  added  up  into  cosine  plus  sine  sine. Again,  I  should  remind  you  of this  formula  sine  cosine  plus  sine  sine. You  can  put  any  sequence if  you  want  to  call  this  Q  one, you  want  to  call  this  minus  two, Then  will  be  x  minus  y.  X minus  y  will  be  minus  bracket. Two,  minus  bracket,  minus  q  two, and  you'll  give  you  Q  two. Even  if  you  subtract  the  other  way  round, you  get  negative  Q  two,  never  mind, cosine  negative  Q  two  is  still  cosine  Q  two, which  basically  means  that  this  term can  be  further  simplified  into  two  only. That  basically  isolate  Q  two.  Isolate  Q  two. We  have  an  equation  with  Q  one  and  Q  two, we  square  them  and simplify  them  using  trigulmetrc  formulas. Then  we  can  get  Q  two. Next,  if  you  move  this  to  the  other  side  of the  equation,  the  kinematics  parameters, and  then  divide  by  two, you  can  get,  and  then  you  take  sine. This  explain  system  over  here, A  cosine  of  this  summation minus  a  one  square  minus  a  two  square, and  then  divided  by  2a1a2 can  give  you  the  first  equation. First,  inverse  kinematic  equation. As  I  said,  once  you  get the  first  equation,  take  note, Q  two  can  be  calculated  given  the  one, the  two,  and  kinematic  parameters  are  known. We  have  Q  two  now. Go  back  to  your  equations, and  then  make  a  remark  that  Q  two  is  known. If  you  look  at  the  equation, Q  two  even  though  it  is  known, but  here  is  a  couple  inside  this  two  term, which  is  sine  cosine  Q  one  minus  q  two. Again,  we  should  expend  them. Expand  them  using  what Because  this  is  cosine  Q  one  minus  Q  two. This  is  sine  Q  one  minus  q  two. You  can  get  this  cosine,  cosine  qua. Cocine,  sin  for  cosine  x  minus  y. Which  means  that  expand this  two,  expand  them. Why  do  you  expend  them because  Q  two  is  known? If  Q  two  is  known  one,  you  expend  them, you  can  calculate  all  the  terms  relating  to. If  it's  coupled  inside,  you  cannot calculate  because  you  do  not  know  what  is  Q. So  we  expand  it  into  this  term. Expand  it.  After  that, look  at  this  equation,  again, it's  something  that  we have  discussed  just  now. These  are  just  two equations  with  two  unknown. Because  Q  two  is  known. Therefore,  this  is  known. This  is  also  known,  can  be  calculated. These  are  also  known.  W  one, W  two  are  user  input, which  are  available  as  input  to  the  program. This  means  that  the  two  equations  are  again, just  two  equations  with  two  unknown, something  like  k1x  plus  k2y  is  equal  to  one. This  is  k  one,  this  is  k  two, this  is  x,  this  is  y. Similarly,  on  the  other  hand, you  have  negative  k2x plus  k1y  is  equal  to  t  two. Then  it  basically  gives  you  x  and  y, x  and  y,  by solving  this  two  equation  with  two  unknown. This  explain  how  we  get  this. Just  solve  this  two  linear  equation. Equation  one,  equation  two, you  must  know  which  one  is know  which  is  not  known. Then  you  can  solve  for  the  unknown in  terms  of  the  known  coefficients. Finally,  you'll  get  x  and  y, which  are  the  two  term,  and  the  sine  sine. Again,  when  you  have  sine  cosine, you  divide  sine  by  cosine. Dividing  sine  by  cosine will  give  you  tangent. Then  take  a  tangent and  cancel  out  some of  the  common  term  after  divisions. You'll  give  you  inverse  kinematics  equation, which  is  to  calculate  Q. Here,  Q  one  is now  known  because  it  can  be  calculated, given  the  B  one, two,  and  also  we already  know  what  is  from the  first  inverse  kinematic  equation. Two  is  No. Therefore,  we  isolate  it  and then  solve  the  two  equation  with  two  unknown. We  get  Q  one  and  two. We  solve  one  and  by solving  this  two  equation. Q  three  is  very  easy  to  solve. This  is  Q  three. Because  in  this  equation, there's  only  one  unknown. This  is  user  input. These  are  kinematics  parameters,  right? Which  means  but  you  just rearrange  the  equation. Rearrange  the  equations, that  means  that  Q  three  is basically  equal  to  d  d  one minus  D  four  minus  the  B  three,  right? D  one  minus  d  four  minus  the  three. Just  rearrange  the  equation. Or  you  move  this  to this  side  and  put  a  negative  sign, and  you  will  give  you the  inverse  kinematics  equation. This  equation  is  quite  easy  to  understand, which  is  this  equation  here. It  says  that  Q  three  can  be  calculated from  d1d4  and  given  W  three. What  is  the  W  three? Remember,  your  two  configuration  vehicular, the  bil  one  x,  the  two  y, the  bil  three  is  z. This  is  z,  correct  This  is  x,  y,  and  z. That  means  the  desired  position  of the  object  that  you  want the  robots  to  pick  up the  desired  position  for the  robot  to  perform  the  task. Given  the  desired  Z, you  can  go  back  to  the  example. I  have  also  uploaded  this slide  in  case  you  want. You  can  find  in  the  additional  materials. I  just  copy  basically the  DH  diagram  to  relate  to  this  example. Basically  this  is  very  easy  to  interpret. T  three  is  this  That  means, where  is  the  desired  position  for your  factor  along  the  z  axis,  this  z  axis. Maybe  you  want  it  to  be  0.5, 0.5  units  above  the  ground.  Maybe. Then  given  this  one,  When the  user  input  this, you'll  go  to  your  program  and  your  program then  will  reach  this  inverse kinematics  equation. Remember,  D  one,  D  four,  no,  this  is  D  one. And  this  is  D  four. You  can  see  it's  actually very  easy  to  interpret. D  one  minus  away  D,  correct? Then  minus  this  one  will  give  you  this  one. Because  Q  three  plus  d four  plus  three  is  equal  to  d  one. Therefore,  if  you  want  to  calculate, what  is  this  extension? That  means  that  you  remember Q  three  is  a  prismatic  joint. Here  you  want  to  calculate  what  should  be the  appropriate  extension  so that  your  any  factor can  reach  for  that  position. This  is  what  inverse  kinematics  is  about. Given  the  task,  find  the  joint  parameters. In  this  case,  this  is  the  extension. Is  a  prismatic  line  where you  can  extend  it  up  and  down. Extend  it  up  and  down. So  as  to  obtain the  desired  length  for  reaching  the  object. As  for  the  last  one, because  45  equal  to  zero. When  you  square  them, When  you  square  them,  you only  get  the  B  six  square. Only  get  the  B  six  square. That  means  that  basically  you  just  square the  last  one,  is  enough. Or  then  you  can  solve  for  the  Q. Be  45  is  equal  to  zero,  right? This  is  a  simple  equation  eventually. Basically,  we  have  discussed about  forward  kinematics  modelings, and  then  we  put  it  into a  two  configuration  form  and  we have  discussed  how  to solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. Foward  kinematics  modeling  is tedious  but  systematic inverse  kinematics  problem is  actually  not  systematic. Therefore,  it  requires some  mathematics  pack  in  trigonometris, as  well  as  careful  observations of  the  equation. Okay.  And  the  next  topic  right I'm  going  to  discuss  is related  to  path  planning. So  the  last  example  in this  chapter  is  about  how  to  plan, right,  your  task,  and  how to  specify  the  tasks. Okay.  In  the  assignment, remember  the  first  step. First  step  is  that  you assign  your  base  frame. Making  sure  that  z  axis aligned  with the  rotational  axis  of  joint  one. X  and  y  is  up  to  you  to  assign. Now,  this  base  frame plays  a  very  important  role  in robotics  because  that  is the  reference  spram  of  your  robots. Which  means  that  where  the  part located  is  always  with respect  to  the  base  spring. That  means  that  if you  want  the  robot  to  pick  up  the  part, you  must  tell  the  robot, where  is  it  located  with  respect  to  its  base. Right? Actually  part  planning  is  just  to  specify the  positions  and orientations,  using  the  base  ring. If  you  understand  that  concept  is  very  easy. I  say  again,  Part  planning  is  just  to specify  the  positions  and orientation  of  your  task, with  respect  to  your  reference  spring, which  is  your  base. Where  do  you  get  the  base  pm, D  H  assignment,  first  step.  First  step. This  reference  prin  is  very  important. Now,  if  you  just  purchase  a  robot  to  use, the  user  menu  will  define  it. Where  is  this  X  Y  Z?  How  is  it  defined? Then  all  your  tasks, you  must  define  respect to  this  reference  spring. Otherwise,  you  cannot  command the  robot  to  reach  for this  position  because  all the  inverse  kinematics problems  inside  program  inside, referring our  respect  to  this  reference  spring. So  you  must  plan  it  in  this  way  so  that the  algorithm  will  work  to  pick  it  up. As  I  said,  our  objective  is to  explain  it  from a  robotics  engineer  point  of  view. That  means  that  you join  some  startup  company, make  some  new  robots. These  are  the  necessary  knowledge. For  programming,  as  I  said, operators  can  also  program. After  you  bought  a  robot, the  company  will  provide  some  training. It's  not  that  difficult  actually. Once  you  have  some  programming  experience, you  will  be  able  to  similarly do  it  for  the  others. The  next  thing  that  I'm  going  to discuss  is  related  to  task  planning. Here,  we  use  a  simple robotic  work  cell  examples  with  a  camera. The  industrial  robots  do not  come  with  cameras. Suppose  that  you  want  to  use  visions, you  must  integrate  it  to  a  camera  system, and  also  assign  codinate  to  your  camera. Assign  codinate  to  your  camera. The  camera  is  very  easy  to  assign the  coordinate  because camera  will  take  a  picture. Picture  is  two  D,  two  D,  so  you  have  X  Y. This  explain  this  X  and  Y. X  and  y,  that  will  define the  positions  in  the  image  space. And  the  depth  of  the  camera, that  means  that  if  you  have  a  camera, the  death  is  referring  to the  distance  from  the  camera  to  the  object. That  will  be  your  This  is how  we  define  the  coordinates  of  the  camera. As  for  the  robot, you  need  to  use  what  D  algorithm. This  is  from  D.  If  you  just  purchase  a  robot, this  is  from  user  menu.  User  menu. We  should  was  obtained  from  D. As  for  the  part.  It's  up  to  you. You  just  assign  something,  for  example, similar  to  the  base  to  the  part. Then  you  can  now  find out  the  relationship between  all  these  coordinates. In  order  to  issue  commands  to  the  robot, using  the  camera  to  observe  the  part. I  want  to  use  the  camera  to  observe  the  part, and  then  I  want  to  issue the  commands  to  the  robot. A  robot  can  only  understand  base  spring. Remember.  You  cannot  understand  camera  frame. What  you  need  to  do  is  to relate  all  this  to  the  base  spring. By  doing  so,  then  you  can obtain  the  location  of  the  pos. Here  we  are  given  two  matrices, but  actually,  this  is the  metric  that  you  need  to  figure  out. Here  I'll  explain  how  do  we arrive  at  these  two  matrices. The  first,  matrix  is the  part  respect  to  camera,  right? That  means  your  camera  is  your  reference. Now,  in  the  sense  that  you use  the  camera  to  look  at  the  part. And  the  second  one, you  use  the  camera  to  look at  the  base.  Right? So  Part  respect  to  camera, base  respect  to  camera. Now  how  do  we  get  all  this  information? Firstly,  this  is  actually  very  easy. Where  is  the  location  of the  pup  with  respect  to  the  camera? That  means  that  you  know the  location  of  the  camera. You  need  to  go  and  do  some  measurements. Where  is  the  location  of  the  pup  along  z. And  if  it's  19  units,  put  19  units. That  means  that  it  is  at 19  units  below  your  camera. Below  your  camera.  And  x  axis  is  this  one. So  just  check.  All  these are  just  example,  right? It  depends  on  where  the  parts  are  located. This  is  just  an  example  where x  is  equal  to  zero, that  means  that  they  are  aligned. No  displacement  along  x. Well  y,  there's  a  slight  upset. Slide  offsets  or  five  units, and  positive  y  is  here. So  the  other  side  will  be negative  negative  five. So  this  is  how  we  figured  it  out, that  means  we  basically  physically  look  at the  task  and  identified  the  location,  right? Location  with  respect  to  this. Now,  this  basically  means  that if  your  camera  can  locate  the  parts. The  other  way  is  that  you  have  a  RGBD  camera. So  you  can  automatically sense  the  de,  Sense  the  death. So  that  gives  you  this  one. Remember  that  you  have  the image  print,  X  and  Y. Using  some  camera  calibration, which  you  will  learn  in  the next  part  of  the  lectures. You  can  also  relate  your  pixels to  the  physical  code,  X  Y. It's  basically  just  some  s scaling  in  this  setup,  correct? When  you  take  a  pictures,  it's basically  scale  it. If  you  know  the  scaling, you  can  restore  the  physical  code in  it  as  well. That's  true,  camera  calibration. After  that,  we  get  this. I'll  explain  this  one.  This  same  thing. It  means  that  where  is  the  location  of the  base  located  with  respect  to  the  camera. You  can  also  similarly  use the  camera  to  sense  the  location  of  the  base. Right?  The  camera  detect the  location  of  the  base. So  this  is  basically  the  two. Next,  I'll  explain  this  first  matrix. There  are  33  columns,  right? Now,  the  three  columns define  the  orientations of  your  part  with respect  to  your  camera  frame. Remember  that  your  camera will  be  the  reference  now. If  you  look  at  this, this  will  be  x  y  and  z,  x  and  z. Therefore,  we  are  looking  at the  locations  of  the  xis  of  the  part. With  respect  to  your  camera  coordinates. Your  x  axis  is horizontal  from  pointing  to your  right,  pointing  to  your  right. You  must  look  at  this  camera, and  then  you'll  see  something  parallel. What  is  y?  What  is  Y? Y  is  010.  Unit  vector. 010.  Axis  100,  y  is  010,  z  is  001. This  basically  means  that  your  x here  should  be  negative.  Of  y. That  means  that  I'm  actually just  expressing  the  vector  x  p, using  my  camera  reference, using  my  camera  reference. This  is  the  first  one. Let's  move  on  to  the  second  one, which  is  now  the  y,  y. You  look  at  y  is  it  is  here. I  is  sara  to  x. What  is  x  one,  zero,  zero. 100.  This  is  negative,  the  other  way  around. This  is  this  way, this  is  the  other  way  around. You  see  this  negative  10,  zero. That  means  that  my  x, my  y  axis  of  the  part, is  a  expressed  in camera  coordinate,  as  negative  100. If  you  understand  that,  then  you  move  on  to the  last  one  will  be  easier. This  is  z,  correct? You  want  to  express  it  with respect  to  camera  frame. Camera  frame,  you  notice  that  this  is  001, which  is  downward.  This  one  is  upward. Again,  you  have  negative  zero, zero,  one,  which  give  you  zero,  negative  one. In  other  words,  I'm  just  putting all  this  vector  x  y  z. With  respect  to  mi  camera  coordinates. Camera  coordinates. So  I  get  the  orientations and  positions  of  the  part with  respect  to  the  camera. That  means  we  assume camera  can  detect  this  part. Okay.  Next.  Similarly,  you can  do  it  for  the  base with  respect  to  the  camera. No  need  to  repeat  it because  you  look  at  the  two, they  are  the  same,  right? So  this  in  this  part  or  the  same. We  just  reproduce  it  as  for  the  location, obviously,  they  are  at  different  location. This  is  fixed.  This  one  is  always  fixed. The  location  of  your  base, respect  to  your  fixed  camera  is  always  fixed. While  this  one  can  change. The  X  Y  Z  of  the  part  can be  anywhere  inside  the  workspace. I  is  always  changing. The  camera  should  always  detect  it. Then  after  that,  given  this, given  these  two  transformation  matrices, we  can  then  proceed  to  find. Where  is  the  part  located respect  to  the  base? That  means  that  you  use  the  camera to  automatically  locate  it, but  you  need  to  use  transformation to  transform  from camera  coordinates  into  the  base  coordinates. This  is  the  idea. And  here,  right,  let us  look  at  this  configuration  again. Suppose  that  your  camera  can detect  the  pup,  right? This  means  but  I  can get  the  location  of the  put  with  respect  to  the  camera. Now  suppose  that  your  camera can  also  detect  the  base. This  basically  means  that  you  can  get the  base  respect  to  camera, right?  Respect  to  camera. But  when  you  want  to  find the  part  respect  to  the  base, what  you  need  is  not the  base  respect  to  camera. What  you  need  is  the  other  way  round. Is  the  camera  with  respect  to  the  base. Correct?  Because  when  you multiply  these  two  together, you  get  the  location  of the  part  with  respect  to  the  base. It's  very  easy  to  understand. This  is  the  part.  Respect  to  camera. Camera  is  a  intermediate  point. Then  you  so  this  is  the  first  one. Then  you  must  also  know  where  does the  camera  located  respect  to  the  base, correct?  Respect  to  the  base. Then  you  multiply  them  together, you  get  a  composite  transformation  matrix, which  give  you  the  part  respect  to  the  base. But  remember,  just  now, We  did  not  get  directly this  transformation  matrix. What  we  get  is  the  other  way  around, is  the  location  of  the  base  with respect  to  the  camera  because  you  use the  camera  to  locate the  parts  as  well  as  the  base. In  this  case,  it's  okay. Remember, the  inverse  transformation  matrix,  right? Just  take  the  inverse  transformation  matrix. You  can  also  get  this. And  you  did  not  find  the  join  matrix determinant  because  there's a  very  simple  property  to  do  so. And  by  doing  so,  you  can  check  that, you'll  give  you  this  matrix.  Okay. This  metric  basically  means  that your  part  is  located  at this  location  with  respect to  the  base,  respect  to  the  base. Which  basically  means  that the  part  is  located at  x  is  equal  to  30  units, and  then  y  is  equal  to  15  units. And  there  is  a  depth  of  one  unit,  right? That  means  the  height  of  this  object  is one  unit  so  that  we  can identify  the  top  surface  center  of the  surface  top  surface  of the  part  and  then command  the  robot  to  pick  it  up. All  right. So  basically,  we  identify the  location  by  using  camera. Then  we  take  inverse  transformations to  get  the  other  way  round. R  to  get  the  camera  respect  to  base. Then  we  can  get  the  locations  of  the  parts, right  using  camera  sensing. This  is  the  location,  which  explained that  we  can  now  find the  locations  with  respect  to the  base  using the  camera  to  locate  the  parts. In  camera  code  it  is. Position  is  not  enough in  order  to  pick  up  this  part. You  must  make  sure  that,  for  example, he  will  grip  at  the  flat  surface. Here,  it  says  that  you  must  craps  it by  the  front  and  the  back,  flat  surfaces, which  means  that  in  this  case, you  want  to  plan  it  this  way, because  this  is  a  ft, right?  That  means  that  you  have  a  part. This  question  asks  you  to  grab  it  this  way. If  there's  no  such  specification, you  may  also  grab  it  this  way. No  problem.  But  this  question that  specifically  says  that  do  it  this  way. You  need  to  follow  this  examples. Firstly,  approach  is  always do  in  this  case,  is  unique. That  means  that  if  you  want  to pick  up  this  part, you  must  approach  it  downwards.  Right? You  must  approach  downwards. So  as  to  pick  up  this  part. But  here,  you  can  see  that your  gripper  must  align this  way  so  that  you  aligned with  this  front  and  the  back. Correct?  Front  and  the  back. Okay.  W  basically  means  that your  R  two  must be  specified  in  a  certain  way. Now  how  do  we  specify this  approach  and  sliding? Remember,  must  be  respect  to your  reference  spring,  reference  spring. X  is  x  is  10,  zero, I  is  a  mistake  here,  100, y  is  010,  z  is  001. Then  your  approach  vector, if  you  want  it  to  be  vertically  downward, then  you  refer  to  your  reference  bring. Is  the  other  way  round  of  your  z, which  is  defined  from the  algorithm  first  step. That  means  that  it  should  be  negative  zero, zero,  one,  which  is  zero,  zero,  negative  one. Here  you  have  a  vector, zero,  zero,  negative  one. Transpose  means  that  ron,  column  become  row. Usually  there's  this  notation  I  three. I  three  is  a  unit  vector,  zero,  zero,  one. I  two  is  zero,  one,  zero, that  means  x  y  z,  pas,  I  one,  two,  three. And  the  question  says  that  you must  align  your  gripper  this  way. This  way.  So  this means  your  sliding  direction, which  is  your  r  two  now. Sliding  direction  is  your  r  two. I  draw  here  actually. He  must  be  parallel  to  your  y  axis. Must  be  parallel  to  your  y  axis. And  he  can  be  both  way. Actually,  it  can  be this  way  or  the  other  way. It's  quite  easy  to  understand  you rotate  this  180  degree, correct?  I  make  no  difference. When  you  rotate  your  gripper, 180  degree,  it  make  no  difference,  correct? Either  this  way  or  that  way  is  this  point. It's  not  unique,  but  you  just  choose  one. This  explain  why  there's  a  plus  minus  sign because  it  can  be  either  way, either  this  way  or  that  way. If  you  choose  this  way, then  it  will  be  zero,  negative  one,  zero. If  you  choose  the  other  way, then  it  will  be  positive  zero, one,  zero,  both  are  fine. Both  are  fine.  But  after  you  have  fixed your  approach  and sliding,  the  other  one,  right? It's  fix.  It  comes  up naturally  from  right  hand rule  or  cross  product. If  you  take  cross  product,  mathematically, it  is  r  two,  cross  r  three  in  this  order, you'll  give  you  r  one. Or  you  can  sketch  it  up  in  this  coordinate and  use  your  right  hand  rule to  deimate  r  one. Here  I  sketch  configurations with  r  two  equal  to  zero,  negative  one, zero,  I  will  give  you r  one  as  positive  one,  zero,  zero. This  one,  by  the  way,  remember is  one,  zero,  zero, one,  zero,  zero,  x  is  always  100. And  this  is  what  it  means. You  approach  it  vertically  downward. Then  your  sliding directions,  you  choose  one  of  them. So  if  you  choose  negative  one, Then  that  will  be your  sliding  direction  here. Finally,  if  you  choose  this  as  negative  one, the  other  one  will  be  one,  zero,  zero. According  to  the  right  hand  room. Suppose  that  you  choose  the  other  way  round, if  you  choose  positive  here, and  you  will  be  negative  here. Depending  on  which  one  you  choose. Either  one  is  correct.  You  need not  put  this  general  one, just  choose  one  of  them,  such  as  this. This  is  the  orientation  to  pick  up the  part  to  pick  up  the  p.  From  there, then  you  can  fit  it  to the  inverse  kinematics  algorithm, given  the  bill  one  equal  to, the  bill  two  equal  to  15, the  bill  three  equal  to  one. Solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem, right  to  get  the  joint  angles as  well  as  given  the  orientations, the  rotational  joint  angles. We  can  then  solve all  this  inverse  kinematics  problem. This  is  just  rough  ideas of  what  we're  going  to discuss  right  after  the  break. We'll  take  a  break  here. Now  it's  about  7:50. Please  come  back  as  usual, 15  minutes  later,  805. Then  we'll  continue  on the  path  planning  part. It  cod Welcome  back.  This  slide  is  basically to  summarize  the  concept that  we  have  learned  so  far. And  to  also  link  them  out of  all  the  kinematics  p  trajectory  planning. Firstly,  forward  kinematics  means  that  you want  to  so  that  given  the  joint  angle, you  can  find  the  position  and  orientation. But  however,  for  robotics, the  task  is  reverse, given  the  position  and orientations  to  realize  the  task, you  want  to  find  out  what  are the  joint  configuration  to  achieve  this  task. This  required  the  solving of  this  inverse  kinematics  problem to  express  Q  in  terms  of the  desired  position  and  orientation. And  finally,  I  give a  brief  overview  of trajectory  planning  based  on  camera, which  is  basically  how  do  you specify  this  x  here? We  say  given  x,  actually, we  need  to  plan  for  x, plan  for  the  positions  and  orientation. Trajectory  planning  is actually  something  simple. It's  just  to  specify  the  positions  and orientation  respect  to  the  ba  spring. This  base  print  is  the reference  print,  as  I  said, is  obtained  from  D  assignment, the  very  first  step. Making  sure  that  z  zero  aligned with  the  joint  axis  of  joint, x  and  y  is  up  to  you  to  assign. Once  you  fix  that,  all  the  commands  should be  issued  respect  or plan  respect  to  the  base  frame. That  means  where  is  the  location  of this  object,  Along  x  axis. Where  is  the  location  along  y  axis, and  what  is  the  location  along  z  axis? This  is  position.  Oientation  is  that  how should  you  approach  the  park. How  do  you  align  your  grip  pup, so  as  to  pick  up  the  pup. Therefore,  to  summarize  the  concept  of trajectory  planning  is  actually  just  to  plan the  task  with  respect  to your  reference  p.  And you  can  see  that  it  will  be  task  dependent. Again,  there's  no  unified  theorems. What  we're  going  to  do  is  that  we'll give  a  lot  of  examples  to  go through  the  trajectory  planning  problem or  basically  task  planning  problem. And  there  are  two  basic  types  of  planning. One  is  called  point  to  point. The  other  one  is  called  trajectory  or  path. He  point  to  point  as  the  name  employed. You  want  to  move  from  one  point  to  another. He  pick  up  one  part  at  one  location and  put  it  down  at  the  other  location. As  for  trajectory  planning involves  a  desired  path. Maybe  you  want  to  draw  a  straight  line, or  you  want  to  follow  a straight  line  to  do  welding, or  you  want  to  follow  a  circle. Circular  ships,  which  means  that the  path  between  your  starting  point and  ending  points  are  also  important. Point  to  point  is  that  you  only consider  desired  locations  and move  it  to  another  location. The  path  in  between  is  not  important, that  means  that  you  may  move  in  any  way, according  to  the  controller. Two  types  of  planning  that  we  will go  through  using  some  examples, point  to  point  and  trajectory. So  I  say  again,  there's  no  systematic  way and  the  parts  are  also located  at  different  location. What  you  need  to  do  is just  to  locate  the  part, with  respect  to  your  reference  pin. Firstly, you  need  to  identify  the  reference  prin, which  is  from  DH  assignment. And  if  you  purchase  a  robot, is  from  the  user  menu. Then  you  start  to  plan  your  work  cell, for  example,  put  all  your  parts, right  around  the  robots. And  then  you  start  to  identify the  location  of  the  part, if  with  respect  to  the  base  string. Here,  we  show  you  examples of  gravity  part  feeders. I'll  just  focus  on  this  location  only. After  you  understand  this,  you  can similarly  do  it  for  the  other  location. They  are  just  locating  at  different  location. In  this  particular  location, take  note  that  it's  located at  certain  distance  away  from  X, certain  distance  away  from  X, and  then  y  is  equal  to  zero. Take  note  that  y  is  equal  to  zero  here, that  means  that  we  assume  that  this  part  is located  at  y  equal  to  zero. As  for  the  rest,  if  y  is  not  equal  to  zero, you  just  find  out  what  is y  and  modify  similarly. The  simplify  discussions,  we  will  only considered  x  z  plane. X  z  plan.  X  z  p  means what  y  is  equal  to  zero. This  is  a  gravity  fat  part  feeders. It  means  that  you  use  the  lot  of  gravity. For  example,  suppose  that the  robot  NE  fectors  remove  this  part. That  means  that  you  pick  up this  part  and  put  it  at  the  other  location. Once  this  part  is  removed, this  part  which  is  stacking  on  top, must  be  able  to  slide  down,  correct? Why  do  we  do  that  is  because  we  want all  the  parts  to  come  to  this  fixed  location. All  the  parts. After  you  remove  one,  the  other  one will  slide  down  to the  fixed  location  so  that  you don't  have  to  keep  planning  your  top. All  the  part  will  be transported  in  this  case, slide  down  to  a  fixed  location, and  your  program  will  just try  to  command the  any  factors  to  this  position, which  is  fixed  to  pick  up  this  part and  put  it  at  the  desired  location. Now,  in  order  for  the  part  to  slide  down, the  angle  of  inclination must  be  sufficiently  large, so  that  it  overcome  the  frictional  force. So  don't  need  to  worry  too much  about  this  equation. This  equation  just  means that  your  angle  of  inclination  must  be large  enough  so  that  the  part  can  slide  down. And  that  angle  obviously  will  depends  on the  frictions  between  the  part and  the  part  feeders,  correct? If  it's  very  smooth, then  you  can  slide down  at  a  very  small  angle. Otherwise,  the  angle  of  inclination must  be  quite  large  for  it  to  slide  down. So  I  said  that  you  need  not  worry. Basically,  physically, you  can  just  keep  increasing  this  beta. Until  it  can  slide  down. So  this  is  what  you  can  do  in  practice. That  angle  of  inclinations  must  be  known. That  means  that  you  fix  it beforehand  so  that  it  can  slide  down. Then  we  will  need to  command  the  robots  to  pick  up  this  part. And  one  important  point  to  take note  is  that  there's  no  gap  between  the  part. Here,  it  shows  that there's  some  gap,  but  in  practice, there's  no  gap  because  it  will just  keep  sliding  down. One  stack  out  on  top  of  the  others. I  basically  means  that in  order  to  pick  up  the  part, you  cannot  put  your  factor  this  way. There's  no  gap  in  between. The  only  way  you  can  pick  up  is  this  way. Any  vector  should  be  aligned this  way  with  the  front  and  the  back  surface. Then  you  can  pick  up  the  pot. Take  note  of  this  and  that  means  that  we have  to  plan  the  orientation  carefully. First,  is  that  your  approach  vector is  always  perpendicular  to  your. Surface  of  the  object. If  there  is  an  angle  of inclinations,  in  this  case,  Beta, because  we  need  to have  an  angle  of  inclination  so  that the  part  the  part  can  always  slide down  to  this  location  after  one  is  removed. This  basically  means  that  we  need to  define  a  vector  R  three, the  approach  vector,  which is  perpendicular  to  this  surface. How  do  you  specify  this  approach  vector, is  specified  with  respect  to  the  base  spring. That  means  that  how do  you  define  that  vector, correct  using  the  base  spring, which  is  obtained  from  first step  of  DH  algorithm. We  know  that  in  order to  represent  it,  in  this  case, the  two  dimensional  space, you  need  to  resolve  the  vectors along  each  of  the  component. For  example,  I  can split  this  R  three  into  two  vectors. Okay.  Vector  addition. This  vector  plus  this  vector is  equal  to  r  three. I  put  in  this  direction  because  I want  to  represent  them  using  x  and  z. In  fact,  you  can  see  that  the vertical  one  corresponds  to  z. The  horizontal  one  correspond  to  x. That  means  that  I  can  get the  vectors  along  x  and  z  axis, add  them  out,  you'll  give  me  r  three. Key  next  is  to  determinate the  magnitude  of  the  vectors. Firstly,  r  three  is  a  unit  vector. Always  remember,  A  tree. Mitude  of  the  vector  is  always equal  to  one  because  it  is  a  unit  vector. If  it's  a  unit  vectors, and  if  you  know  the  angle of  incarnation  Beta, which  means  that  this  angle  is  known. Then  you  can  determine  the  vectors  of the  vertical  one  has  cosine  Beta. Y  cosine  Beta  because  this  is unit  vector,  Manitue  one. One  times  cosine  Beta basically  give  you  the  manitue, which  is  cosine  Beta,  simply, and  the  horizontal  one  will  be  one  si  beta, which  is  simply  si  Beta. I'm  trying  to  explain how  do  we  arrive  at  this? K  basically  is  this  is  x,  y  and  z. Remember,  we  are  in  the  x  z  plane  on, y  is  equal  to  zero. If  y  is  not  equal  to  zero, you  just  put  something  there. Here  y  is  equal  to  zero. Then  x  is  basically  this  one. X  axis,  the  manitude  is  sine  Beta. We  have  sin  Beta  times  100,  correct? Sine  Beta  times  10, zero,  which  is  this  vector. Y  e  zero.  Now,  this  is  in  this  direction, which  is  the  opposite  of  this. In  this  case,  you  will  be  negative  Beta  100. When  you  add  vector  addition, basically,  you  get  this  one. That  means  that.  Let  me  just  put  it  this  way. Sin  Beta  Si  Beta  will  be  one,  zero,  zero, plus  cosine  Beta  downward will  be  zero,  negative  one. You  add  them  up. Vector  additions.  I  basically give  you  this  r  three. What  you  see  over  here  is  that  you want  to  specify  this  approach  vector. Using  the  base  string. Because  for  robots, the  reference  strain  is  a  base. Everything  has  to  be issue  with  respect  to  the  base  frames. Then  the  robots  can understand  where  is  the  location, solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem, find  the  joint  angles  to  pick  up  the  part. This  is  the  idea.  This  is the  orientations  in  terms of  the  approach  direction, correct?  Approach  direction. Now,  this  parts  are  stacked  end to  end  so  that  when  one  is  removed, the  other  one  can  slide  down, by  the  law  of  gravity. Which  means  that  you  can only  approach  it  this  way. You  can  only  claps  it  in this  front  and  back  surface because  there's  no  gap  in  between.  Then. This  will  be  stacking  on  top  of  the  others. This  basically  means  that if  you  have  an  vector, you  need  to  rotate  it,  correct? You  need  to  rotate  it so  that  your  sliding  surface, remember  that  the  en  vector has  a  sliding  vector. You  must  rotate  it  so  that  is  either pointing  towards  you  or away  from  you,  correct? This  is  a  sliding  vector. I  rotate  it. I's  either  pointing  towards you  or  away  from  you. Towards  you  away  from  you. Now,  this  is  your  x  axis. This  is  this  is  your  Z  axis  and  remember they  are  from  D.  First  step. Where  is  Y?  Is  not  sketch  over  here, but  actually  y  is  here. According  to  right  hand  groups. We  know  that  y is  pointing  into  this  white  board, pointing  into  the  white  board. Remember  your  sliding  direction is  either  pointing towards  you  or  away  from  you. That  means  either  pointing into  the  white  board  or out  of  the  white  board. This  basically  means  that  there  are two  possibilities  because  y means  zero,  one,  zero. Y  is  010. Either  positive  or  negative. 010  will  be  your  sliding  vector. As  I  said,  both  are  okay because  you  rotate  180  degree, the  gripper  is  still  pointing to  the  same  direction. After  you  have  obtained the  approach  and  the  sliding, sliding  is  either  pointing towards  you  away  from  you. Then  the  last  one must  be  fixed  by  right  hand  rule. Fixed  by  right  hand  rule. If  you  can  either  sketch  it  out  or  you can  use  this  cross  product, R  two  cross  three  in this  order  to  find  out  what  is  r  one. So  to  summarize,  R three  must  be  specified  by  a  vector, which  is  at  90  degree with  respect  to  this  surface, and  it  will  depends  on  your  orientations of  the  part  feeders,  right?  Okay. The  second  one,  the  sliding  vector is  not  depending  on the  part  feeder  orientation because  it's  either pointing  towards  you  or  away  from  you,  right? So  for  example,  you  to be  pointing  towards  you. This  is  pointing  away  from  you. If  you  choose  pointing  towards you,  you  put  the  negative. If  you  choose  the  same  direction as  y,  that  would  be  positive. After  that,  you  take the  cross  product  between  them. Or  you  sketch  it  out  using  cically. You  can  actually  check  that  r  two, will  be  pointing  in  this  direction. That  means  that  you  must imagine  that  here  there's r  two  pointing  towards  towards  you. Then  according  to  right  hand  rules, R  one  should  be  pointing  upward. After  that,  then  you  can  just try  to  sketch  it  out  using  two  vectors, this  vector  and  this  vector. I  mean,  if  you  sketch  it  all  graphically. The  other  way  is  just to  calculate  it  directly. If  you  sketch  it  out  this  way, then  this  would  be, I  remember  just  now  this  was  beta. This  is  actually  Beta,  and this  is  a  unit  vector  one. This  means  that  this  is  a  sine  Beta, this  is  cosine  Beta. Cosine  is  in  the  x  direction. The  sine  is  in  the  z  direction. So  you  can  basically specify  the  normal  vector, with  respect  to  your  reference  bring. This  is  your  reference  bring. So  I  hope  you  get  the  idea that  basically  planning  is just  to  specify  the  positions and  the  orientation  vectors. We  respect  to  your  reference  frame. So  that  the  robot  can  understand. What  should  be  the  position  and orientation  that  is  aiming for  because  it  reference frame  is  the  base  pram. And  then  solve  the  inverse  kinematic problem  to  find  out the  location  of  to find  out  the  joint  configuration, to  accomplih  this  to. We  have  specified  only  the  orientation. Next,  let's  go  through  how  do  we  specify the  position  for  this gravity  fat  part  feeders. As  I  said,  this  part  is always  slide  down  to  this  location. Which  will  be  located  at a  fixed  distance  away  from  your  base. Fixed  distance,  end  of  the  part  feders. Let's  call  it  F  at a  fixed  distance  away  from  the  base. Maybe  ten  CM,  t  CMs depending  on  the  actual work  cell  configuration. Right.  And  I  will  amplify  this  diagram. Again,  I  have  provided  all  these  sloide. If  you  want  you  can  go  and  download  it. If  not,  you  can  just  refer  to  this  one. You  give  you  the  same  thing  actually. Now,  here,  basically,  to find  the  location  of  the  center  of  the  part, usually  the  robot  vector will  try  to  aim  for  the  center. Aim  for  this  centroid  so  that  it  is  stable. In  case  of  any  slight  inaccuracies, you  have  more  torance. You  aim  for  the  center.  And  in  this  case, we  want  to  locate  the  centroid, the  center  of  the  park with  respect  to  the  base. This  is  your  reference.  Let's  look  at  x. The  positions  of  the  centroid along  the  x  axis  is  simply f  plus  this  distance  minus  this  distance, F  plus  this  one  minus  the  one  on  top, that  means  the  b  line add  up  together  minus  the  line  on  top. And  we  can  actually relate  all  the  dimensions. According  to  the  dimensions  of  your  parts, as  well  as  the  angle  of  inclination. Let  us  assume  that  this  is a  que  with  the  length C.  Q  means  all  the  length are  equal  to  the  s.  Everything  is. Everything  will  be  C,  and the  centri  will  be  half. Half.  This  is  also  half. If  we  know  this  one, half  C,  and  you know  this  angle  of  inclination. For  example,  you  can  see  that  half  C, cosine  Beta  give  you  this  length, F  plus  half  C,  cosine  Beta, F  plus,  Half  C, sine  Beta  is  this  location. A  but  centra  is  located  here, so  you  must  do  this  half  C  sine  Beta. Half  C  sine  Beta, subtract,  half  C  sine  Beta. Then  you  give  you  this  location of  the  part  respect  to  the  base. Basically  just  some  geometrical  information. As  you  change  the  angle  of inclination,  you  just  put  it  here. As  you  change  this  system, you  just  change  this  one. We  derive  a  general  one so  that  anytime  if  you want  to  move  or anytime  you  try  to  change the  angle  of  inclination, maybe  the  part  has  more  friction. You  need  to  increase the  angle  of  inclinations, then  you  can  just  easily  change  this  one. Y  was  equal  to  zero,  correct? Remember,  in  this  case, y  x  x  z  p  no  need, y  is  equal  to  zero. That  means  this  centroid  is located  at  y  equals  to  zero. If  not,  then  just  put  something  there. According  to  the  fiscal  location. Lastly,  z,  z  is  this  axis, the  centroid  The  central is  located  at  a  distance away  from  the  origin  of  the  base  frame, which  is  indicated  by  these  two  green  line. This  plus  this  will  be equal  to  the  z  location. That  means  the  cent  is  located  at a  distance  away  from the  base  along  the  z  axis, which  is  pointing  upward. Over  here,  we  can  see  that  this  green  line, this  distance  is  basically what  half  C  sine  beta. Half  C  sine  Beta,  correct? Plus  add  on  this  one, which  is  half  C,  C  sine  beta. Half  C  sine  Beta  plus  half  cosine  beta give  you  the  centroid  location, with  respect  to  the  base  along  the  z  axis. That  means  P  gland  is  just to  locate  the  location  of  your  part. Typically,  we  aim  for  the  centroid, with  respect  to  the  right after  this  part  is  removed, the  next  one  will  slide down  to  the  same  location. So  we  don't  have  to  keep  planning  it  right. You  make  sure  that  something  is transporting  the  part  to  a  fixed  location. So  we  just  plan  it  once  and  for. If  it's  changing  typically, you  should  use  vision,  as in  the  previous  example. We  managed  to  locate  the  part, with  respect  to  the  base, and  we  have  also  planned  the  orientation, by  using  the  base. And  this  is  the  final  transformation  matrix of  the  p  with  respect  to  the  base. Again,  this  is  the  location  of the  par  with  respect  to  the  base. This  represent  the  orientation  of  how your  en  eftors  so  align, and  approach  with  respect  to  the  base  string. We  specify  it  with  respect  to  the  base  str. Remember  that  the  approach  vector should  be  per  particular to  the  top  surface  of  the  part, and  that  will  depends on  the  angle  of  inclination. Then  your  n  vectors can  only  grabs  from  the  front  and  the  back. Of  the  part  because  there's no  gap  between  each  part. It  is  zero,  one, zero,  or,  zero,  negative  one, zero  because  you  must  align  with  the  y  axis, which  is  either  pointing  towards  or away  from.  To  solution. After  that,  x  comes  out  from  right  hand  root. In  fact,  x  is  redundant. It's  just  to  complete  it. Usually,  the  approach  and  the  sliding, is  sufficient  to  complete  the  task. Basically  to  summarize, trajectory  planning  is just  to  specify  the  locations  of  the  object, respect  to  the  base  frame, and  to  think  how  any  factors  should  approach the  pup  and  specify  that desired  orientation with  respect  to  the  base  sm. After  you  have  obtained  X, then  you  need  to  fit  it  to the  inverse  kinematics  algorithm, which  is  obtained  by  solving the  forward  kinematics  equation. So  as  to  find  out  what are  the  joint  configuration. To  achieve  this  task,  right? Because  always  remember  that robots  are  low  level  machine. You  must  tell  it  exactly  what  to  do. What  should  we  joined  in  one, two,  three,  four,  five, six  so  that  your  end  efector  will  reach for  a  particular  position with  a  particular  orientation, and  that  come  from  path  planning. This  slide  basically  summarize the  concept  that  we  have learned  so  far  and  I've  also  updated  it. We  will  go  through  more  examples because  as  I  said, p  planning  is  very  specific  task. But  some  of  them  can  be planned  in  advance  in  a  more  general  way. Just  now,  we  plan  it  in terms  of  a  general  angle  of  inclination, general  distance  F  so that  you  can  just  put  in the  particular  parameters as  your  workspace  changes. Next,  I'm  going  to  talk  about one  very  common  part  planning  problem. Is  called  pick  and  place  problem,  right? Peak  and  place  problem. Now,  the  peak  point  is  easy,  correct? Just  now,  we  have  shown  it. If  you  have  a  location, At  a  certain  distance away  from  your  base  frame, you  can  plan  the  peak  point,  right? Easily.  Where  is  it located  with  respect  to  the  base  frame, how  you  want  the  factor  to  approach  the  park and  put  it  in  terms  of  your  base  coordinates. So  this  is  called  the  peak  point, where  you  want  to  pick  up  the  park. Pak  and  place  means  after  you  pick  it  up, you  want  to  place  it  at  another  location. Right?  After  you  pick  it  up, you  want  to  drop  it  at  a  certain  container. So  that  will  be  peak  and  place. Now,  at  one  grants, it  looks  like  only  two  point, Peak  point  place  point, but  it's  more  complex  than  that. It's  illustrated  over  here. After  you  pick  it,  you  need to  move  it  to  some  location. Some  locations.  And  then before  you  place  it  down, you  also  need  to  position well  at  another  location. Let's  look  at  this  again. After  you  pick  it  up,  in  fact, you  need  to  move  to one  location,  Vertically  upwards. This  is  called  the  lift  four  point. After  you  pick  it,  you  live  it  up. Leave  it  up  to  a  certain  locations. All  this  depends  on  how  high, right?  You  want  to  live  it  up. Before  you  move  it  to  this  location, aim  for  it,  and  place  it  down. Altogether,  actually  four  points. Pick  Lave  it  here. Come  to  this  location,  and place  it  down.  Pick  and  place  it. Not  just  two  point. Actually  at  least  four points,  sometimes  even  more. So  Peak  point  depends  on the  location  of  the  object  that  you  want to  pick  respect  to your  base  reference  frame,  right? If  your  base  reference  frame  is  that, then  you  just  locate  it. Where  is  it  located  respect to  your  reference  frame? Okay.  After  you  have after  you  have  planned  your  peak  point, The  left  f  point  can  be  easily planned  with  respect  to  the  pi  point,  right? Because  it  has  a  certain constant  upset  away  from  it. This  slide  basically  illustrate  how  you need  to  plan  in  order to  move  it  to  a  lift  f  point,  right? That  means  after  you  pick  it, you  need  to  lit  it  up  to  a  certain  position. Now,  basically,  this  looks  mathematical, but  let  me  just  explain  this  way, you  have  pick  up  something. That  is  your  peak  point. The  peak  point  is  already  known, and  the  orientations  to pick  up  is  already  planned. So  this  is  plan,  and  this  is  planned. What  you  want  to  do  is  that  you want  to  move  it  to a  certain  location  away  from  your  peak  point. Before  you  aim  for the  other  positions  and  prese  it  down, this  is  so  called  the  leaf  ft  point. Now,  let  us  look  at  this  base  stream. Now,  everything  must  be specified  in  terms  of  your  base  stream. Suppose  that  here, we  have  the  location  of  the  peak  point, with  respect  to  the  base  stream. This  explain  this  vector  over  here, which  is  the  peak  location  vector  X  Y  Z. Where  is  the  locations of  the  part  to  be  pick  up? With  respect  to  the  base  frame  X  Y  Z. If  this  is  obtained  already, we  can  have  this  position  vector  here. Next,  you  have  the  orientations to  pick  up  this  part. You  aim  for  a  certain  approach  directions. You  align  the  sliding  directions  with one  of  the  flat  surface  to  pick  it  up. Basically,  you  have  R  pick. This  is  the  location  to  pick  it  up. Orientations  to  pick  it  up. Now,  your  approach  vector, if  you  are  at  this  mobile  frien. Looking  at  this  approach  vector  is always  zero,  zero,  one. This  is  defined  as  I  three.  This  is  what? Mobile  codinate. Someone  sitting  at  the  end  vector, looking  at  the  approach  direction, no  matter  how  it  turns,  is  always  001. But  if  you  want  to  transform it  into  the  base  frame,  right? You  need  to  multiply  by the  transformation  matrix. This  matrix  basically  transform the  approach  vector  in the  base  into  the  base  stram which  is  a  fixed  spring,  correct. This  basically  means  what? Y  distance  over  here  in this  leave  off  point  is  simply  just  to transform  the  approach  directions  defined  in the  mobile  frame  into the  base  spring,  into  the  base  spring. In  the  V  at  this  stage. This  vector  is  defined  this  way. Now,  to  leave  it  off,  you  need  to move  in  the  opposite  direction,  correct? This  is  approach  to  lift  it  off, you  need  to  move  in  the  opposite  direction. That  explain  this  negative  term  here. You  want  to  move  after  you  pick  it  up, you're  going  to  move in  the  reverse  directions, and  V  is  the  distance. Along  that  unit  vector, distance  along  that  unit  vector. This  is  something  very  flexible. Depending  on  the  orientations  to  pick  it  up, depending  on  the  distance  which you  want  to  redraw  to, then  you  just  put  it  there. And  then  you  can  see that  vector  f  the  vector,  correct? Vector  addition,  the  location of  this  respect  to  the  base, that  means  the  lip  of  point, location  with  respect  to  the  base  is this  vector  plus  this  vector,  right? This  factor  plus  this  vector. And  you  basically  get  the  lift  point. This  one,  you  can  view  it  as  P  lift  off. Locations  of  theft  point. And  it  can  be  planned  from  the  pick  p  point. At  a  certain  distance away  from  the  pick  up  point. So  it's  kind  of  move  backward. After  you  plan  this  one. From  the  orientations  and  the  positions, you  move  backward  by a  certain  distance,  right? Negative  means,  move  backward, then  you  reach  that  position, and  by  vetter  addition, so  I  can  locate  the  leaf  of  point. This  ex  the  meaning  of  this  term. And  you  maintain  the  same  orientation,  right? Just  maintain  the  same  orientations. So  RP  is  also  used. So  therefore,  this  is  what  we  will  do, pick  it  up,  leave  it,  right, and  then  move  to  a  certain  location. Before  you  pres  it  down, say  Let's  look  at  it  again. Pick  point,  live  it,  leave  for. Then  pres  it  down,  correct? Pres  it  down.  Pre  down  point is  also  easy  to  plan. Where  is  the  location  respect to  your  base  spring? Right? Where  is  the  location  respect  to  your  basepr? That  will  be  the  praise  point. The  only  thing  that  we  have  to  take  note  is that  unlike  the  peak  point, which  you  can  have  some  tolerance. The  pla  point  required  quite  high  accuracy. Because  sometimes  you  may  crash  it, if  you  do  not  specify the  pase  down  point  properly, you  may  actually  try  to  push it  downward  and  crash  the  object. In  some  cases,  you  may  drop it  Once  you  drop  it  from  a  certain  distance, after  it  drop,  it  may  not be  at  the  exact  location. This  requires  some  careful  planning. The  tolrans  must  be  quite tight  and  your  robot  must have  good  accuracy  and repeatability,  in  order  to  achieve  this. This  is  just  some  precaution, on  the  praise  down  point. Now,  this  is  another  point we  call  set  down  point.  Set  down  point. Now  we  have  seen that  if  you  have  the  peak  point, you  can  plan  the  leaf  of  point. Similarly,  if  you  have  the  praise  point, you  can  also  plan  the  set down  point,  same  thing. You  just  plan  it  according to  the  praise  point. Once  you  got  this,  just  move  backward, move  backwards  with  respect  to the  praise  down  point, that  means  you  plan  it. This  is  planning.  Once  you locate  the  praise  point, use  the  praise  point  to  locate the  set  down  point. This  explain  this  matrix  over  here, which  is  very  similar  to  what I  explained  just  now,  correct? You  have  basically the  mobile  frame  approach  direction, transform  it  into  the  reference  frame, move  in  the  reverse  directions by  a  certain  distance, add  up  with  the  pase  location. That  means  this  vector, this  is  a  reference  spring. This  vector  plus  this  vector will  give  you  this  vector, which  is  the  location  of  the  set  down  point. All  this  can  be  done  in  a  general  way. It  can  be  any  distance, if  the  location  change,  you just  change  this  location. Altogether,  at  least  four  points. When  I  say  at  least  four  points, it  means  that  sometime  you  may  need  more. For  example,  if  there's  something  in  between the  two  location,  right? One  way  is  that  you  make sure  you  list  sufficiently  high. That  means  that  all  this  point will  have  some  constraint  on V.  It  must  be  higher than  the  height  of  this  obstacle. But  remember  that  a  production  operations do  not  just  do  one  pass. This  peak  and  pace  starts needs  to  be  repeated  many, many  times  1,000  times  10,000  times. Suppose  that  each  of this  cycle  take  a  longer  time, then  the  overall  efficiency is  not  that  good,  not  that  high. One  way  to  overcome  this  problem  is that  We  take  some  short  cut, that  means  that  instead of  lifting  it  so  high, at  some  point,  actually, you  can  take  some  short  cut. Move  to  another  location,  take  short  cut. So  as  to  speed  up  each  operation. And  if  you  repeat  it 1,000  time,  10,000  times, over  a  long  period  of  time, is  significant  saving  in  the  efficiency. This  basically  explain the  next  diagram  over  here. Sometimes  you  need  more point,  need  more  point. All  this  can  be also  executed  at  different  speed. For  example, if  you  want  to  pick  up  something, you  need  to  move  to  the  live  up  point, and  you  can  move  it  very  fast because  there's  nothing  there. Move  it  as  far  as  possible. After  that,  you  need  to  go  down  to  pick  up the  object  from  the  leave  off  point and  that  should  be  slow. That  should  be  slow. Once  you  reach  the  peak  point, pause  it,  pause  it, that  means  zero  speed,  and  after  that, grabs  it,  grabs  it and  go  back  to  the  same  location. I  say,  again,  you  go  to  the  lift  point, go  down  to  pick  it  it, then  you  go  back  to  the  lift  point  again, and  this  should  be  performed  slowly. But  when  you  go  to this  intermediate  point, you  can  do  it  faster. Do  it  faster  until  you reach  the  set  down  point, Then  again,  just  do  it  slowly  again, go  down,  grabs  it, and  then  we  draw  back  to the  set  down  point  and  then repeat  the  cycle  again. We  go  back  the  same  way, go  back  to  the  lift  point, pick  up  the  part  and  keep  doing  it. This  is  what  we  call pick  and  place  operations, and  this  is  just  to  illustrate that  you  can  put  the  speed  differently. In  some  cases,  you  can  do  it  faster, but  some  cases  you  need  to  do  it  slowly. Otherwise,  the  task  may  fall  sometime. This  is  pick  and  place, and  lastly,  I  want to  talk  about  continuous  path. Planning.  As  a  name  employ,  in  this  case, it  is  not  just  moving from  one  point  to  another  point. It's  just  not  just  moving  from one  point  to  another  point. You  also  want  to specify  path  in  between your  starting  point  and  ending  point. This  is  called  trajectory  and  path  planning, trajor  and  path  planning. What's  the  difference  between  these  two? Path  is  just  spatial  information. I  has  no  temporal information,  no  time  information. For  example,  if  we represent  if  we  represent  the  motion  control, in  terms  of  the  two  configuration  space. Remember  that  you  need to  put  it  into  the  position, which  is  three  dimensional, and  also  take  the  approach  vectors, which  is  three  dimensional, multiply  by  functions  of  the  row  angle, that  will  represent  your  position  and orientation  in  a  minimum  representation. After  that,  you  need  to  plan  a  path  for this  factor  and  plan the  orientation  for  this  factor. Let  me  show  you  a  animation  first. Now,  you  can  see the  orange  line  are  the  path, Circle,  straight  lines, which  the  factor  need  to  follow. Not  only  it  must  follow  this  path, it  must  also  maintain  some  orientation. In  this  case,  it  is  fixed. The  orientation  is  fixed while  performing  this  task. A,  which  means  that  you  need  to specify  the  positions  of  your  factor. At  all  this  point, and  at  the  function  of  time. That  means  at  t  zero,  where  should  it  be? At  T,  the  next sample  time  interval,  where  should  it  be? And  you  keep  increasing the  sample  time  until you  reach  the  final  time. This  is  called  the  trajectory. Once  you  put  a  time information  into  the  path, you  get  a  trajectory. Let's  go  back  to  this  one  again. Now  path  is  just  a  geometric  information. Straight  line,  circle. There's  no  temporal  information. And  if  you  add the  temporal  information  into  it, For  example,  at  t  equal  to  zero,  you  stop. Then  you  follow  the  straight  line. At  t  equal  to  maybe  ten  second, you  must  reach  the  end. This  specify  the  speed, how  fast  you  want  to complete  this  straight  line  path. At  any  time,  there's  always  a  target  point. By  two  second,  you  must  reach  this  point. By  three  second,  you  must  reach this  point  by  four  second, five  second,  six  second. At  all  time,  you  have  a  specific  position, and  that  is  called  trajectory. There's  a  difference  between path  and  trajectory. Usually,  we  can  plan  the  path  first, then  convert  it  into  traectory by  adding  some  time  or  temporal  information. L  et  s  formally  define  two  trajectory, Let  f  be  path. Let  f  be  a  path a  curve  in  a  two  configuration  space, which  is  six  dimensional. Let's  define  as  a  function  of  time. This  is  called  the  speed distribution  functions, and  you  will  map  the  time  interval  of your  t  zero  to  t.  Into  01, that  means  you'll  normalize  it. That  at  t  equal  zero, this  speed  just  function  is  zero, at  the  final  time  is  equal  to  one. Basically,  we  just  normalize  it. Then  five,  the  curve, the  path  can  be  defined  in  terms  of  Lambda, which  will  change  0-1. Lambda  change  0-1,  you trace  the  path,  trace  out  the  path. If  you  associate  this  Lambda with  functions  of  time, it  basically  tells  you  at  what  location? Right?  At  what  time it  should  be  what  location. Lambda  will  become  a  functions  of  time. At  one  grant,  it  looks  very  mathematical, but  actually  it's  something that  all  of  us  know. Let  me  show  you  one  example. This  is  a  straight  line path,  straight  line  path. And  you  want  the  robot to  follow  this  straight  line  path, and  the  robot  can  only understand  reference  spring. There  must  be  a  reference  prim. If  this  is  a  reference  prim, I'm  just  showing  an  example, then  I  can  define this  path  if  we respect  to  the  reference  plain, which  means  but  y  is  equal  to  zero, x  will  be  changing  from  zero to  a  certain  final  point. If  x  is  changing  0-10, that  will  trace  up a  straight  line  path  where y  is  equal  to  zero. There's  no  temporal  information yet  because  this  is just  a  straight  line  path, geometrical  information. If  you  put  the  time  in,  temporal  information, t  equal  to  zero  is  start  at  x  equal  to  zero, T  equal  to  ten  second, you  must  reach  ten along  the  straight  line  path. Then  that  will  become  a  trajectory. Basically,  this  is  how  it  works. At  t  equal  to  zero, x  is  equal  to  zero. At  at  t  equal  to maybe  C t.  You  should  reach  ten. In  between,  we  can  represent  it  using a  straight  line  where this  can  be  represented as  a  function  of  time. Because  the  gradient  is  ten  divided by  capital  t.  Then  you  multiply  by  the  time. The  temporal  information,  basically, you  can  get  the  positions  at  any  time. The  position  at  any  time. This  is  called  a  trajectory. At  any  time,  you  can  calculate  x,  correct? At  t  equal  to  zero, you  can  see  that  it's  zero. At  t  equal  to  t, it  reach  ten,  right? I  reaches  ten.  This  is  a  trajectory. Now,  what  is  speed  distribution  function? I  simply  dt  over  here. It's  simply  distant  over  here, T  divided  by  capital  t, and  this  is  Lambda. This  is  Lamda,  which  is  associated  with the  speed  distribution  function because  Landa  is  defined  0-1. When  T  reach  capital  T,  you'll  reach  one. Is  equal  to  zero  when  t  is  equal  to  zero, S  is  equal  to  one  when  t  is  equal  to  t, and  that  is  called your  speed  distribution  function. Based  on  this  example,  if  you  go  back to  read  this  again,  you'll  be  clear. The  speed  distribution  functions, basically  map  the  time  intervals  of your  operation  time  into  zero  and one.  Into  zero  and  one. With  this  speed  distribution  frame, you  can  convert  your  path  into  a  trajectory with  temporal  information or  speed  information. Okay  Let  us  go  back  to this  speed  distribution  function  again. This  looks  like  a  very  simple  formulation, but  it  has  one  problem because  if  you  differentiate this  respect  to  time,  is  always  constant. This  is  always  constant.  In  fact, if  you  look  at  this  graph, there's  always  a  constant  gradient. This  basically  means  that at  the  initial  point, you  must  start  at  a  constant  speed. And  at  the  ending  point, you  end  at  a  constant  speed, which  is  not  possible,  correct? How  can  you  start  from  a  finite  speed? And  how  can  you  end  at a  final  speed  because you're  supposed  to  stop  there? Not  keep  moving. This  will  have  some  problems, and  that  means  that  it's  not  possible to  use  this  kind of  speed  distribution  function. What  we  do  is  that  we  modify  it  slightly, we  must  stop,  correct? At  the  end  point. Stop  means  speed  equal  to  zero. Speed  equal  to  zero  means that  the  positions  do  not  change  anymore. Finally,  it  should  stop  at  ten. Starting  point  should  start  from  zero. And  speed  equal  to  zero  means  p  gradient, equal  to  zero,  gradient  equals zero  means  p  horizontal. No  speed.  These  are the  starting  ending  constraint. For  your  trajectory  x, K  in  between,  we  can  still  use  this  one. Maintain  a  constant  speed  in  between. After  that,  you  interpolate  it. Smoothen  it  out.  Smooth  it  out, use  some  curve  to  smoothen  it  out, this  will  give  you  this  trajectory. Here  I'm  trying  to  explain that  you  must  start  from  zero  speed. Initially,  you  must  start  from  zero  speed. Then  you  slowly  ramp  up  to  a  constant  speed. Before  you  reach  your  final  point, you  must  slowly  reduce  your  speed  to  zero. You  start  from  zero speed  increase  to  a  constant  speed. Keep  moving  with  a  constant  speed. Before  you  reach  the  final  position, you  must  slowly  reduce the  speed  back  to  zero. You  must  start  from  zero  speed and  at  zero  speed. I'm  trying  to  explain  this  curve  over  here, this  graph  over  here,  which  is S.  I  says  that your  speed  should  start  from  zero. Then  you  ram  it  to  a  constant  speed, ram  it  to  a  constant  speed at  a  certain  time  interval. All  this  is  flexible  up  for  you  to  design. Then  you  maintain  a  constant  speed. Until  you're  about  to  stop,  right? If  you  stop  at  t, a  few  seconds  before  you  stop, you  must  start  to  reduce  the  speed. Start  reducing  the  speed  two,  zero. That  means  that  you  ramp  up  the  speed, maintain  constant  speed,  ram  it  down  to  zero. These  are  just  straight  line. You  can  easily  plan  it. Say  constant  speed. What  is  your  speed  limits of  your  manipulators? You  can  put  this  constant  speed  here, maybe  10  meter/second,  just  for  illustration. Here, how  many  seconds  you  want  to  ramp  it  up. Correct.  Maybe  two  second, and  this  is  ten  second. Second.  You  start  to,  ram  it  down. Now,  based  on  this, you  can  see  you  can  actually specify  all  this  straight  line. Correct?  S  functions  of  time. We  can  easily  specify all  this  straight  line  as  function  of  time. That  will  be  the  differentiation of  a  speed  distribution  function. S  top.  That  means it's  easier  to  plan  from  S  top. How  do  you  get  S  integrate? That  means  that  you  plan  based  on  a  stop. The  speed,  start  from  zero  speed, gram  up  to  a  constant  speed within  how  many  second, maintain  the  speed  for  how  many  seconds. Then  you  start  to  reduce  the  speed,  and  stop. From  there,  you  integrate  it, then  you  can  get the  more  speed  distribution  function. Rather  than  just  constant  speed  throughout. Just  now  the  one  I  show  you  is just  constant  speed  throughout.  Right. In  this  case,  involve  some  adjustments  from zero  to  the  constant  speed  and then  reductions  from the  constant  speed  to  zero. I  say  again,  after  you  plan  this  one, you  integrate  it  to  get your  speed  distribution  functions, and  that  will  enable  you  to  start  from rest  and  end  at  rest. This  example,  ignore  it, no  need  to  worry  about it  because  next  lecture, we'll  introduce  a  method, which  will  be  easier. This  example  is  just  to  show  you  the  problem. So  as  to  introduce  a  solution. This  basically  is  that if  you  have  a  trajectory, you  need  to  specify  the  speed,  right? Speed.  If  you  have a  speed  desired  speed  for  your  end  factor, this  is  referring  to  your  endu  factor, you  must  specify  the  speed for  your  joint,  right? That  means  that  your  joint  so rotate  at  a  certain  speed  and  coordinate  in such  a  way  that  your  en  factor  will  follow this  trajectory  at  the  specified  speed. Which  means  that  you  have  another  problems, given  the  speed  of  the  end  factor, you  want  to  find  the  speed of  the  joint,  correct? Given  the  speed  of  the  end  factor, you  must  convert  it  to  the  speed  of the  joint  because  robot, as  I  said,  is  a  low  level  machine. Everything  is  corresponding  to  the  joint. This  one  is  just  to  show  you  that  if you  want  to  get  the  speed, you  need  to  differentiate all  this  equation,  correct? You  need  to  differentiate  all  this  equation, which  is  actually  quite  tedious because  these  are not  straightforward  equations. They  are  tangent  arc  sine,  correct, which  can  still  be differentiated  sometimes  in  some  cases, but  that  is  not  the  best  solution. In  all  this,  this  is just  a  differentiation  of the  inverse  kinematics  equation. You  differentiate  differentiate. First  kinematic  equation,  you  get  this  one. Then  you  differentiate  prose P  four,  you  get  this  one. After  that,  you  differentiate Q  inverse  kinematics, you  get  this  one,  followed  by Q  four  and  Q  five. All  the  differentiations  are  shown  here. But  this  is  just  for  your  information. Because  next  week  we  will  introduce a  method,  which  is  easier. These  methods  will  involve differentiations  of  the  inverse kinematics  equation, which  is  very,  very  difficult  to  obtain. So  we  have Introduce  trajectory  planning, which  will  be  task  dependent. But  the  main  idea is  to  specify  the  position  and orientation  of  your  task  with respect  to  your  base  plain  reference  pram, and  there  are  two  main  types  of  planning. One  is  point  to  point. The  other  one  will  be  path  planning or  trajectory  planning. After  that,  after  you  plan  all  this, you  need  to  put  into  your  inverse  kinematics algorithms  to  find the  corresponding  joint  angles. In  in  terms  of  the  speed, you  You  need  to  find  out  what  is  Q  dot. One  way  is  to  differentiate this  equation  on  both  side. But  that  is  not  the  best  way  to  do  it. As  I  mentioned,  we  only talk  about  this  next  week. Finally,  for  tragedy  findings, sometimes  we  cannot  specify the  path  using  some  geometrical  information. Straight  line  can  be  quite  easily  planned. Straight  line  you have  equations  to  represent. Circle  You  can also  represent  using  equations, and  then  assign  temporal  information by  using  speed  differentation  function. But  there  are  some  paths, for  example,  this  one. Is  very,  very  difficult  to  specify it  using  some  equation,  correct. Explain  the  purpose  of this  section  4.4,  interpolated  motion. Because  any  path  can be  broken  down  into  many  points,  correct? Depending  on  how  accurate  you  want. Which  means  that  my  path, I  can  identify  many  points. Sufficient  points.  So  that  I  can  then plant  the  trajectory  from  one  to  another. That  means  you  plant the  ratory  from  here  to  here, then  plant  the  trajectory  from  here  to  here, and  you  keep  planning  it, then  you  form  a  continuous  path. Continuous  path  as  a  function  of  time. Remember,  trajectory  means  that  I  want this  path  as  a  functions  of  time  at  any  time. I  must  know  what  is  the  location  and what  is  the  speed?  At  this  location. Here,  I  will  just  show  you  two  points. Why?  Because  if  you  know  this, You  can  similarly  do  it  for  the  rest. There  are  just  22.2  points  that  you keep  doing  this  until you  reach  the  final  point. Let's  look  at  just  this  two  points. Now,  here  we  use  a  bit  polynomials. That  means  it  means  t  to  the  part  of  three. We're  going  to  plan the  path  as  a  function  of  time. Qb  means  t  top  of  three,  t  to  two, d  one,  d  zero  constant, and  there  are  four  unknowns. A,  CD. That  means  that  to  represent a  trajectory  in  between these  two  point  as  a  functions  of  time. We  need  to  find  out  four  parameters. A  B  C  and  D. Now,  if  you  have  four  unknown  four  unknowns, to  solve  for  four  unknowns, ABCD,  you  need  four  equation. You  need  four  equations. Where  do  we  get  the  four  equation? Basically,  the  positions. Starting  positions,  ending  position,  right? Give  you  two  information. How  about  the  other  two? Starting  velocity,  ending  velocity. Starting  velocity,  ending  velocity. This  explain  why  we  use  Q  because you  have  starting  position, ending  position  two. Starting  velocity,  ending velocity,  another  two. That  means  that  if  you  only use  position  and  speed,  you  can  only  use  Q. If  you  want  to  specify  the  acceleration, starting  accelerations, and  then  the  ending  acceleration. In  this  case,  you  can  put  t  to  five,  right? Because  y? Five  unknowns.  Sorry,  six  unknown,  one, two,  three,  four,  five,  six, six  unknown,  you  need  six  equation. Where  do  you  get  the  six  equation, two  from  position,  two  from  velocity, two  form  acceleration,  starting and  ending,  starting  and  ending. This  is  a  basic  idea. That  means  that  I  one  trajectory, to  fit  the  starting  and  ending  position and  to  fit  the  starting  and  ending  velocity. I  want  to  find  a  b  CD so  that  at  t  equal  to  zero, it  start  from this  position  with  this  velocity. At  t  equal  to  the  next  time  interval, it  end  at  this  position  with this  velocity.  This  is  the  idea. If  you  understand  that,  the  rest is  something  that  we  all  know. Firstly,  at  t  equal  to  zero, suppose  that  you  have  this  starting  position. This  means  but  when  you  put  t  rez  into  here, you  get  only  d.  This basically  means  that  d is  your  starting  position. If  that  is  the  very,  very  first  point. D  then  at  the  next  time  interval, T,  you  want  it  to  reach  the  B  one. You  put  t, you  get  this  equation  and  you must  reach  this  position. Right?  Reach  this  position which  you  obtain  from  the  path. You  just  knock  down  all  this  point. And  in  between  will  be  a  function  of  time, which  we  try  to  find out  through  this  equation. From  here,  we  have  two  equation  now. Equation  one,  equation  two, but  you  have  four  known, A  B  C  d.  Correct? We  need  two  more  equation. Where  do  you  get  the  other  equation? Just  now  I  mentioned,  velocity. Initial  velocity,  and  the  ending  velocity. T  equal  to  zero  equal  to  c. How  do  you  get  velocity? Differentiate  this  equation? You  get  the  velocity. Vlocity  is  three  a  t  to  p  two  plus  two  b  t plus  c.  D  differentiate disappear  because  it's constant,  independent  of  time. Then  at  t  equal  to  zero, if  you  have  a  initial  speed, maybe  speed  equal  to  zero, then  C  will  be  equal  to  zero, depending  on  the  actual  speed. Then  we  can  basically put  t  equal  to  zero  here, zero  here,  we  get  C, C  will  be  your  initial  speed. Next  at  t  equal  to  capit  t, you  put  capita  t  here, and  that  will  be  your  final  speed, and  you  get  another  equation. Altogether, for  equation,  you  saw  for  what? You  solve  for  ABCD,  right? In  other  words,  you  want  to  find  ABCD  that specifies  the  starting  and  ending  constraint. Starting  positions  constraint, ending  position  constraint  two, starting  velocity  constraint, ending  velocity  constraint, another  two,  f.  This we  because  we  have  constraints, meaning  that  you  can  form  four  equations to  solve  for  the  ABCD. Now,  you  want  accelerations. If  you  need  to  use  fifth  order  polynom  mil. Then  we'll  give  you additional  two  more  equations to  specify  the  constraint. Here  this  bit  and you  solve  for  all  these  four  equations. You  can  get  this,  which  is  inside  the  slot. I'm  just  explaining  how we  get  all  this,  ABCD. If  you  understand  this  concept, you  can  do  it  similarly,  correct? For  the  next  two  point. In  this  case,  what  you need  to  do  is  that  you  have one  equation  at  t  equal  to  maybe  T  one. Starting  positions,  starting  velocity at  t  equal  to  t  two. The  next  time  in  the  vow, you  have  another  two  equation. Actually  is  just  this  at  Q, plus  p  t  squared  plus  c  t  plus d.  Then  you  put  t  equal  to  t  one, one  equation  equal  to  the  one. T  equal  to  t  two, put  into  here,  equal  to  the B  two,  get  another  equation. After  that,  you  differentiate this  to  get  velocity. Then  again,  you  put  t  equal  to  t  one. Equate  it  to  V  one, you  get  the  third  equation. Put  t  equal  to  t  two, equate  to  V  two,  you  get  four  equation. And  then  put  it  to the  computer  so  four equation  with  four  unknowns. You  can  get  AVD. For  the  next  time  interval. All  this  is  changing.  That  means you  need  to  keep  doing  it. Keep  doing  it,  V  three, keep  doing  it  at  each  segments, your  ABCD  will  be  different. One  thing  to  take  note  is  that your  ending  constraint  for this  segments  will become  the  starting  constraint. Right?  Of  the  next  segment, they  must  be  the  same. Otherwise,  your  trajectory  will not  be  continuous,  right? There  will  be  a  jump  in  speed  or  position. So  I  say  again,  the  ending  constraint of  the  first  segment  become the  starting  constraint,  right? Of  the  next  segment.  So  same  thing  you  keep repeating  ending  of  this will  become  the  starting  of  the  next  segment. So  as  to  achieve  a  continuous  path  prending. With  this,  I  end my  lectures  on  trajectory  planning, which  is  basically  how  to  specify the  task  by  referring  to  the  base  prem. It  is  not  unique,  it's  really  task  dependent. What  we  did  is  that  we  just  go  through some  very  common  applications  point  to  point. For  trajectory,  there  are  also  two  types. One  is  that  you  can  easily write  down  the  equation, equation  of  straight  line  equation  of  circle. The  other  is  that  you  can't even  associate  them  to  equations, then  you  use  interpolation. Break  then  down  into  multiple  points. The  specify  the  path. Then  you  just  plan  segment  by  segment. Plan  segment  by  segments  based on  the  temporal  information  by  fitting, starting  and  ending  constraint  in  terms of  positions  and  velocities. If  you  also  want  to specify  the  accelerations, then  you  need  another two  more  degree  of  freedoms. That  means  fifth  order  polynomial. Because  this  required  differentiations of  the  inverse  kinematics  equation. So  next  week  next  week, we  will  do  something  different. We  will  differentiate the  four  kinematic  equation and  then  derive  something  similar. That  will  be  next  week. And  a  reminder  on  your  first  CA, it  will  be  held  on  23  September, and  you  will  start  at  7:00 P.M.  Only  30  minutes  quiz. The  topic  will  cover everything  that  I  cover  today. Week  four.  And  we will  do  it  in  this  LT.  Right? I'll  announce  the  sitting  arrangement later  by  e  mail. So  please  prepare  for  it. Format  similar  to  exam  question,  right? Exam  format,  paper  and  pen. You  can  refer  to the  past  year  exams  questions. That  will  be  the  format  for  this  quiz. And  there  will  be two  more  quizzes  that  will  be announced  by  Professor  Hugo ang  after  the  recess. Okay.  So  I  my  lecture  here  today. Thank  you.  I  do.
