Okay.  Good  evening,  class. In  week  one,  basically, we  prepare  you  for the  modeling  of  forward  kinematics. And  last  week,  we  started  to  model the  forward  kinematics by  using  DH  representations. And  I  provided  this  summary  in the  Tn  cough  site. So  a  has  to  summarize the  steps for  driving  forward  kinematics  equation. Recall  that  the  purpose  of forward  kinematics  model  is  to get  the  equation  so  that given  the  joint  angles, of  the  robot,  you  can  use  the  model  to derive  the  positions  and orientations  of  the  u  factor. At  the  end,  you  want  to  calculate the  position  as  well  as the  orientation  of  the  eftors as  functions  of  all  the  joint  variable, Joint  one  joint  two  joint  three,  et  cetera. In  order  to  do  that,  we first  need  to  assign  code  in  it. And  if  we  leave it  to  individuals  to  assign  the  coordinates, you  can  see  that  everybody  will  come  up with  a  different  way  of  assigning. DH  algorithm  is  just  a  way  to  standardize  it, standardize  it  so  that all  the  robotics  engineers will  be  able  to  understand how  the  coordinates  are  assigned  and  use it  for  the  productions or  manufacturings  of  the  robot. This  is  basically  what  DH  algorithm  is  about. After  you  have  assigned  the  codinate, using  DH  algorithms,  then  you  will use  it  to  find  the  four  sets of  kinematics  parameters. Starting  from  the  base  all the  way  until  the  two. This  is  the  second  steps, and  the  four  sets  of  kinematic  parameters include  two  joint  parameters and  two  link  parameters. The  four  kinematic  parameters  basically  tells you  the  relationship  from one  coordinates  to  another. For  example,  what  is the  transformation  matrix from  the  base  frame, which  is  zero  frame  to  the  first  scram. This  is  one  respect  to  zero. As  it  involves four  fundamental  transformation  range rotate,  translate,  translate  rotate. I  make  no  sense  to  do  matrix  multiplications in  every  coordinate  transformation from  one  to  another. That  means  that  0-1,  you do  four  multiplication. F  one  to  two,  you  do  another  multiplications. This  is  not  so  effective. Therefore,  in  robotics, we  basically  derive  a  general  one. This  is  a  general  one  for any  four  kinematics  parameters. That  means  that  given  any  joint  angle, given  any  joint  distance, given  any  link  length and  given  any  link  twist  angle, H  will  be  able  to  use  it  to calculate  the  transformations from  one  to  another. As  I  explained  in  last  week, you  need  not  memorize  it. This  is  commonly  available  in  all  textbooks, and  in  terms  of  assessment  or  exams, this  transformation  metrics  will  be  provided. But  however,  you're  expected  to remember  the  DH  algorithms  and know  how  to  define the  kinematics  parameters  because these  are  very  fundamentals. After  you  have  derived all  the  transformation  matrixes, all  the  way  until  the  two  frames, then  you  can  multiply  them  together. Starting  from  the  base, multiply  all  the  way  until the  last  joint,  which  is  a  two  frame. I  here,  you  will  get one  single  transformation  matrix from  the  two  frames, with  respect  to  the  base  frame. This  is  n,  with  respect  to  zero, which  is  typically  two with  respect  to  the  base. And  by  doing  so, then  you  can  get  the  four  kinematics  model. This  is  just  a  remark  that sometimes  it  is  useful  to partition  your  multiplication  into  two  parts. Because  your  First  three  joints, other  major  axis. The  remaining  one  is  basically  relating to  the  orientations,  minor  axis. Some  robot  company,  they  may also  make  the  first  three  joints  similar, and  then  the  last  three  joints, maybe  slightly  different. Some  with  lesser  degree  of freedom,  three  degree  of  freedom. So  maybe  have  two  degree  of freedoms  for  the  minor  axis, and  some  may  have  more. It  makes  sense  that  you  calculate this  transformation  matrix  of the  major  axis  so  that  you  can  use  it for  all  the  subsequent  models. This  is  a  remark  that sometime  it  is  useful  to partition  it  into  this  form. Regardless  whether  you  partition  or  not, you  have  to  multiply  everything together  eventually because  this  will  give you  the  forward  kinematics  model. We  call  the  arm  equation. The  final  transformation  matrix  is the  relationship  of  the  two  frame with  respect  to  the  base  frame. It  means  that  if  you  have a  mobile  frame  attached  to  the  end  e  factor, What  is  the  relationship between  this  mobile  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  spring, which  is  a  fixed  spring. This  is  similar  to  what  we study  in  the  first  lectures. How  do  we  get  the  transformation  matrix of  the  mobile  frame, with  respect  to  the  fixed  sprain. The  only  difference  is  that  this  mobile  frame is  actually  a  functions  of  the  joint  angle, which  basically  means  that  if joint  angle  one,  two, three,  four,  five,  six, and  so  on,  changes, your  positions  of  your  mobile  frame, which  is  this  translation  of the  origin  of  the  mobile  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  frame. This  translation  will  change. As  the  functions  of  the  joint  angles. And  at  the  same  time, the  orientation  will  also  change. The  orientation  is  described  by a  rotational  matrix  because basically  the  rotation between  the  mobile  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  frame tells  you  the  orientation. So  this  is  basically the  orientation  of  the  two  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  frame. And  this  orientation  matrix  R, which  you  get  by  partitioning your  final  transformation matrix  into  this  form, is  actually  this  three  time  three  matrix. Translation  is  this  three  time  one,  vector. This  is  three  times  one. Well,  this  is  three times  three,  three  times  three. Because  it  is  three  times  three, it  can  be  put  into three  cons,  one,  two,  three. Three  columns,  that  means  that if  you  have  three  times  three  matric, You  can  partition  it  into  three  vectors. The  fiscal  meaning  of  these  three  vectors are  indicated  here. This  is  basically  r  one, which  is  actually  x.  R two  is  y  is  a  sliding  direction. R  three  is  actually  z. Because  when  we  assign  the  DH  algorithms, remember  that  the  last  step is  to  assign  the  two  codinate. Make  sure  that  z  aligned with  the  approach  direction. Make  sure  that  align with  the  sliding  directions, then  x  is  the  normal  direction, which  is  perpendicular  to  y  and  z, and  we  assign  it  according to  the  right  hand  rules. This  is  the  fiscal  meaning. Which  basically  means  that  over  here, we  can  now  calculate  the  position. Of  the  factor  as functions  of  the  joint  angles. Given  joint  angles,  calculate  what  x  y,  z. Calculate  x  y,  z. Where  is  the  x  positions  of  the  factor? Where  is  the  z  positions and  where  is  the  y  position with  respect  to  the  base  spring. From  there,  we  can  then  command the  robot  to  move  by  using a  controller  so  that  you  can position  the  factor  at  a  certain  position. But  however,  position  is not  enough  because  in order  to  pick  up  the  pup, you  need  to  align  the  gripper with  the  pup  in  order  to  pick  it  out. For  example,  if  there's  an  object  over  here, you  need  to  first  approach it  vertically  downward. This  means  that  you  need  to  specify a  directions  in  which any  factor  should  approach. Also,  you  need  to  align your  gripper  directions using  R  two  so  that  you can  align  properly  with  the  flat  surface. Then  you  can  pick  it  up  in  a  stable  manner. Otherwise,  if  you  pick it  up  at  arbitrary  orientation, sometimes  it  may  not  be  a  very  stable  grap. This  is  basically  what  we  have  done last  week  and  we  have  gone through  some  examples. Today  lectures  is  to review  again  by  providing  more  examples. I  will  have  two  examples. For  the  first  examples, the  objective  is  just  to go  through  the  overall  steps. Not  so  much  about  the  detail  max, but  to  go  through  the  overall  steps to  see  how  we can  combine  everything  together. As  I  said,  the  first  step is  what  DH  representation. DH  representations, DH  representation  says  that you  assign  all  the  z  existes, very  easy  to  remember. Assign  all  the  z  axis first,  how  do  you  assign? The  order  joint  axis. C  zero  is  the  axis  of  the  first  joint, and  you  just  move  on  to  the  next  joint, z  one  and  z  one  is  the  axis  of  join  two. And  you  move  all  the  way  until the  last  joint. First  thing  to  remember  is  that z  order  joint  axis. After  you  have  assigned  all  your  joint  axis, that  means  after  you  got  all  the  joint  axis, then  you  try  to find  the  intersection  between  them. If  they  intercept,  that  will be  the  origin  of  your  next  spring. If  they  do  not  intercept, then  there  is  a  rule  there  saying that  find  a  common normal  between  the  joint  axis, and  after  that,  intersections  of  a common  normal  with the  current  joint  axis  will  be  the  origin. Based  on  z,  you  can  also  find  the  x  axis because  x  axis  is  perpendicular  to  z  axis. Finally,  after  you  have  got  your  x  and  z, then  y  comes  up  naturally from  right  hand  roles. This  is  what  we  have  discussed  last  week. The  other  thing  to  take  note  is  that once  you  reach  the  n  factor  frame, then  that  rules  doesn't  apply  anymore. You  need  to  assign  it  according  to the  physical  meaning  of  the  n  factor. Assign  z  as  the  approach  direction, y  as  a  sliding  direction, then  x  is  the  normal  directions. Once  you  have  assigned  the  coordinate, then  you  can  define the  four  sets  of  kinematics  parameters. Well,  the  first  two  sets are  the  joint  parameters. You  can  see  that  it's  quite  systematic. The  relationship  of  x  respect  to  z. This  is  angle,  while  this  is  distance. Then  you  reverse  it,  reverse  it. Here,  it  becomes  z  instead  of  x. And  here,  instead  of  z,  it  become  x. It's  reverse.  And  here you  calculate  the  relationship, relationship  between  z  with  respect  to  x. One  is  distant,  one  is  angle. There's  also  a  physical  meaning  which  I  gone through  in  last  week. As  I  said,  we'll  go  through two  examples  today. In  the  first  examples, We  just  want  to  go  through the  complete  process  to understand  all  the  steps. Not  so  much  about  the  details in  the  sense  that  here, we  assume  that  you  already got  the  link  coordinate. How  do  you  get  the  link  codinate?  Sorry. Firstly,  again,  just  to  review, all  the  z  axis all  the  z  axis  are  the  joint  axis. All  the  z  axis  are  the  joint  axis. Here  you  can  see  D  one,  D  two, d  three,  dt  four, and  lastly,  d  five. There  are  only  five  joints in  this  robot  system.  Only  five  joints. Next  is  to  take  note  that  For  the  last  frame. It  does  not  follow  this  rule  anymore. For  the  last  frame,  it  is  always. Z  is  the  approach  vectors, y  is  a  sliding  vector, and  n  is  the  normal  vectors. After  that,  based  on  all  the  z, you  start  to  identify the  origin  and  the  x  exists. This  is  how  we  do.  Try  to extend  all  the  z  exists. And  see  where  they  intercept. Right?  When  you  assign  z, you  assign  at  the  joint  position. But  after  that,  you  extend and  see  where  they  intercept. He  if  they  intercept  here, that  will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  spring. As  for  the  base  bring  is  always  at  the  base. You  just  assign  this  one. X  and  y  is  up  to  you. So  long  as  you  can satisfy  the  right  hand  roles. So  the  base  the  only  guideline  is  that  assign z  zero  to  be  the  rotation  axis  of  joint  one. As  I  said,  after  that,  we join  z  zero  and  z  one. We  know  that  the  origin of  the  next  sprain  should  be  here. From  there,  we'll  assign  x  two. X  two  should  be  perpendicular to  z  zero  and  z  one, 90  degree,  perpendicular  tagona. You  have  two  choices. You  can  put  this  way or  this  way.  Both  are  fine. That  means  that  if  you and  your  friend  want  to  check  ons, typically  you'll  see  that sometimes  you  assign one  direction  and  the  other  one may  assign  the  other  directions. Both  are  fine.  Both  are  fine. This  is  not  a  restriction  but  a  guideline. After  that,  then  you'll  assign y  according  to  right  hand  rules. You  must  be  familiar  with  right  hand  rules. Then  after  that,  you  move  on to  the  next  join. And  try  to  extend  them. Sometimes  you  see  that  they  are  parallel. If  they're  parallel,  they  will  not  intercept. In  this  case,  you  need  to find  a  common  normal  between  them. This  is  a  common  normal. That  means  that  this  line, the  vertical  line  is  making  90  degree. With  respect  to  both  z  axis, z  one  and  z  two. This  is  a  common  normal.  Then  you take  the  intersections  of  the common  normal  with  the  current  z  axis. That  will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  spring, which  explain  why  this  origin  is  here. After  that,  x. Remember  x  should  always  be perpendicular  to  the  z  axis,  correct? The  common  normal  is  perpendicular  to  both. Therefore,  your  x  axis, it  will  be  along  here, and  DH  algorithm  says  that  point x  away  from  the  previous  joint. Point  it  in  the  opposite  directions of  the  previous  joint. This  explain  how  we  get  this  X  two. Now,  by  the  way, this  when  there  is  a  joint  angle, you  can  draw  it  at  any  configuration. Here  you  have  theta  one,  theta two,  and  Theta  three. Let  me  just  show  you  how  it  looks  like  again. This  is  actually  data  one. Data  one,  and  this  is  actually  Da  two. I  can  put  Data two  in  these  directions,  correct? Maybe  if  I  put  zero, it  is  the  directions. But  if  you  put  n  degree, then  it's  up,  correct. You  can  also  put  27  zeros. Let  me  do  it  again. This  is  a  robot. This  is  joint  one,  and  this  is  joint  two. Joint  two.  Now,  when  you  draw  the  DH  diagram, if  there  is  a  joint. Be  careful  only  if  there's  a  joint, then  you  can  draw  at  any  configuration. For  example,  you  want  to draw  at  T  two  equal  to  zero. Then  this  will  be  the  configuration. If  you  want  to  draw  at  the two  equal  to  90  degree, then  it  will  be  vertically  upward. If  you  want  to  draw  it  at  270  degree, then  we  will  be  downwards, or  180  degree, then  you  will  point  to  the  other  directions. This  is  because  there's  a  joint. If  there's  a  joint,  you  can  drain it  at  any  directions. For  example,  zero  degree, 90  degree.  Same  thing for  the  other  joint,  this  joint  over  here. You  can  draw  it  at  this  configuration. You  can  also  draw  it  at  this  configuration. So  it's  up  to  you.  So  long as  there  is  a  joint, you  can  just  rotate it  to  any  angle  as  you  wish. So  as  to  draw  it. This  robot  over  here, take  note  that  in  this  case, the  first  three  joints  actually  can  be rotated  in  a  similar  way. So  this  is  how  we  get  it. In  fact,  this  is  the  first  three  joint. We  draw  it  vertically upwards  in  the  sense that  here  there  is  a  joint, D  two,  correct?  This  can  rotate. Just  now  I  show  it  to  you,  you  can  rotate left  or  right  by  rotating  T  two. Now,  you  can  also  rotate  this way  and  raw  it  this  way. This  is  same  as  last  week  example. In  fact,  for  this  robot, the  first  three  joint  is  the same  as  example  2.10. But  here  we  sketch it  in  another  configuration. Just  to  let  you  know  that  you  need  not always  sketch  it  in  that  fixed  manner, so  long  as  there's  a  joint  angle. I  say  again,  if  there's  a  joint two  there,  you  can  rotate  it. Rotate,  sketch  it  this way.  This  was  last  week. This  week  we  sketch  it  upward, Sketch  it  upward,  and everything  will  be  the  same. Because  we  are  just  drawing the  diagram  at  the  particular  configuration. One  thing  to  take  note  is  that for  this  robot, here,  actually,  there's  a  fixed  90  degree. Fix  90  degree,  you can  see  that  there's  no  joint. This  is  the  joint,  and  this  is  the  joint. For  this  one,  there's  no  z  here  to  rotate  it. Therefore,  this  one  you  must draw  in  this  manner. I  I  don't  know  whether  everybody can  see  you  can  see  that this  projector  is  90  degree, is  fix,  which  is  fixed. You  cannot  rotate  it.  You  cannot  rotate  it. This  one  you  can  rotate.  If  you  can  rotate, you  can  draw  it  this  way  or  this  way. Right?  This  is  what the  meaning  of  this  DH  diagram. You're  just  drawing  it  at a  particular  configuration. But  if  there's  no  joint, you  do  not  rotate  it. That  means  that  if  you're  trying to  draw  it  this  way, then  you'll  be  wrong  because  you  did not  represent  this  configuration, which  is  a  camera  pointing  downward. This  is  very  similar. Now,  after  you  have  assigned all  the  coordinates  according  to  DH  diagram, then  the  next  step  is  to define  the  four  kinematic  parameters. The  first  three  joints  are  similar,  correct? So  I'll  not  go  through  that. Is  exactly  the  same  as the  Example  2.10  last  week. He  let  us  just  go  through the  joint  four  and  joint  five, starting  from  joint  four. Now,  over  here,  Joint  four, the  kinematic  parameters  of  joint  four. He  actually  tells  you  the  relationship between  this  frame  and  this  frame. What  is  the  relationship between  this  brim  and  this  brim? That  means  what  is the  coordinate  transformation  of this  brim  respect  to  the  previous  spring. To  understand  the  relationship  between  them. One  way  is  that  you use  the  definitions  of the  kinematic  parameters. The  other  way  is  to  see the  coordinates  initially  coincide, that  means  imagine  this  one  was  here. Initiate  here,  in  the  exact  configuration, try  to  figure  out how  you  move  to  this  location. Try  to  figure  out  how you  move  to  this  location, and  it  can  be  done  by  align  X  and  align z.  Align  x  will  give you  the  two  kinematics  parameter, joint  angle  joint  distance. The  relationship  between X,  with  respect  to  z. Relationship  between  x  with  respect  to  z. For  example,  over  here, this  is  your  x  three. This  is  your  x  four. Therefore,  the  joint  angle now  is  equal  to  zero,  correct? You  are  drawing  it  at  a  joint  angle equal  to  zero,  but  don't  put  zero. If  you  put  zero  here,  you're  wrong. Because  remember,  what  is  the  objective  of forward  kinematics  modeling  is  to derive  a  general  model  so that  given  the  joint  angle, you  can  use  it  to  find the  position  and  orientation. Given  any  joint  angle. Therefore,  you  must  put  Q  four.  Put  Q. But  you  may  put a  bracket  there  saying  that  currently, is  it  equal  to  zero. But  don't  replace  q40. This  is  the  first  kinematic  parameter, that  means  that  currently  the  joint  angle four  is  equal  to  zero because  we  sketch  it  at joint  angle  four  equal  to  zero. After  that,  we  can see  that  it  is  equal  to  zero, y  because  there  is no  translations  of  x  respect  to  z.  Z  is  here. Meaning  what,  both  of the  x  axis  are  on  the  white  screen,  correct? Z  axis  is  into the  white  screen  into  the  white  screen. So  they  are  on  this  paper. There's  no  translation  between  them. Therefore,  this  is  equal  to  zero. That  means  that  you  rotate  by  joint  angle. After  that,  x  is already  aligned  as  far  as  z  is  concerned. So  no  more  transformation  is  needed. Next  is  to  align  z. Now,  z  three  is  here.  Z  four  is  here. I  need  to  translate  along this  direction  by  a  distance  of  D  four. This  is  the  next  one, a  tran  translations  by, a  distance  of  A  four. That  is  called  your  link  length. Now,  after  it  is  translated, you  can  see  that  it's  not  aligned  yet. Z  is  not  aligned  yet. There  is  a  angle  of  90  degree  between  them. You  can  go  and  put  down  90  degree  first. After  that,  there  is  a  sign. At  this  stage,  take  note  that  your z  three  and  z  four  are  already  the  same, correct?  Already  the  same. Next,  we  will  do  with  respect  to  x  four. Sorry,  X  three  and  x four  are  already  the  same. The  next  is  to  rotate  three  and  z  four. Three  and  four  respect  to  x. Right  andrew  says  that if  this  is  your  reference, which  is  x  four,  then this  direction  will  be  positive. This  direction  will  be  positive. But  however,  now  we are  rotating  the  other  way  round. The  other  way  round.  Therefore,  we have  a  negative  sign  here. This  means  that  in  in  order to  align  these  two,  right  around  these  two, you  can  see  that  I  need  to  rotate downward,  right,  rotate  downward, rotate  downward  by  90  degree, and  right  hand  rule  says  that rotate  downwards  will  be  negative,  right? Because  this  is  my  reference, M  x  is  my  reference. Here  you  can  see  that  basically you  rotate  by  joint  angle, translate  by  joint  distance, then  translate  by  link  length, then  rotate  by  link  tres  angle. But  it  make  no  sense  to  multiply these  four  matrices  together  every  time. We  have  a  general  one  later  on. We  just  substitute  this particular  parameters  into  the  general  one, which  is  derived  for any  four  kinematics  parameter. Then  we  can  get  the  particular  one. Next,  we  move  on  to last  joint  in  the  last  joint, We  have  also  four  sets of  kinematic  parameters. Firstly,  the  five  is  here. D  five  is  here,  either  you  put Q  five  or  theta  five. It  means  the  same  thing. Next  is  to  take  note  that  this  Q  five, currently  in  this  direction. This  is  x  four, and  this  is  x  five. X  four  and  X  five are  making  an  angle  of  90  degree. Mybe  a  sketch  it  here. This  is  my  X  four. This  is  my  x  five. There's  an  angle  of  90  degree. This  basically  means  what your  joint  angle  your  joint  angle  here, currently  is  90  degree. Well,  you  don't  put  90  degree. Don't  go  substitute  Q  five  by  90  degree. B  because  of  the  way that  you  have  sketched  this  one, you  sketch  x  in  these  directions,  Therefore, he  becomes  it  becomes  90  degree. If  you  sketch  it  some  other  way  round, for  example,  this  way,  right? Then  you  can  sketch  x  y  this  way  into the  right  into  the  hit  board. Then  basically,  you  are  sketching it  at  zero  degree, correct?  Zero  degree.  Okay. Why  we  can  do  that  is because  there's  a  joint  angle here.  You  can  rotate. You  can  rotate  to  any  angle  that  you wish  and  and  sketch  it. But  we  do  not  replace  this  by  90  degree. Do  not  replace  by  90  degree.  Put  Q  five. But  if  you  want  to  remind yourself,  he  put  a  bracket. Currently  is  90  degree. And  why  negatively  because it's  respect  to  your  z. Right?  This  is  this  is  your  z  axis,  correct? This  is  your  x.  Rotate  this  way,  right? You  need  to  rotate this  way  to  align  with  this one.  Rotate  this  way. Is  against  the  right  hand  rule. From  here  to  here  is against  the  right  hand  rules because  this  is  your  reference. The  other  way  around  is  positive. This  is  negative. Which  means  that  currently  is  negative  90, just  for  your  information only  because  this  one. No  need  to  put  this  also  no  need  to  put. Just  put  a  general  angle  90  degree. Let  us  assume  that  we  rotate by  a  joint  angle  of  90  degree. Rotate  by  joint  angle  of  90  degree. After  that,  you  can  see  that x  and  x  are  not  aligned  yet. This  is  my  x.  This  is  my  x. There  is  a  translation. There's  a  translation  of  D  five  respect  to  z. Next  is  that  z  be  x  should  move  downwards, correct  X  should  move dow  along  the  directions  of z  to  this  location. This  explain  what  is  D  five. Now,  once  you  reach  that  location, you  can  see  everything  is  already  aligned. Four  and  z  five, they  are  already  aligned. This  explain  why  the last  two  are  equal  to  zero. You  need  not  translate  anymore. You  need  not  rotate  anymore because  the  origins  are  the  same, and  z  axis  are  parallel, which  means  that  you  need  not  rotate  anymore. I'm  trying  to  explain to  you  the  physical  meaning so  that  you  don't  have to  remember  the  definition. You  just  look  at  the  relationship between  the  coordinates and  try  to  figure  out  what are  the  kinematics  parameters. This  is  second  steps  of the  follow  kinematics  modeling to  get  the  kinematics  parameters. After  we  have  obtained the  four  sets  of kinematic  parameters  for  each  joint, we  can  then  use  them  to  calculate the  transformation  metrics  from one  frame  to  another. This  sep  is  quite straightforward  in  the  sense that  you  just  substitute all  these  parameters. Into  here.  For  one,  two,  three,  four, five,  just  substit  one  by  one, into  here,  this  general  one. For  example,  K  equal  one, then  you  just  put  k  equal  to  one. Then  you  have  one, one,  everything  become  one. Just  copy  it  down,  because  this  is  standard. We  need  not  derive  it  again. We  just  use  it  as  something  like  a  lookout, formula  that  we  can use  it  to  get  the  particular  one. After  that,  you substitute  all  these  parameters. For  example,  this  one  if  it's  0.5, then  you  just  put  this  as  0.5. A  is  equal  to  zero, and  just  go  to  all  the  A, put  them  equal  to  zero. Right?  And  D  one is  your  variable.  It  must  be  a  variable. If  you  put,  for  example,  zero, then  you  can  see  that there's  no  more  joint  angle. You  cannot  use  it  to  calculate the  four  kinematics  anymore. Lastly,  Alpha  one  is equal  to  negative  90  degree. Pluck  it  into  here,  cosine  sine, sine,  press  calculator. Just  press  calculator. And  repeat  it  F  k  two,  k  three. You  will  get  zero  to  one for  k  equal  to  one,  and  K  two, you  get  one  to  two, and  k  equal  to  three,  similarly  three  respect to  two,  and  so  on  and  so  forth. This  is  the  major  axis. You  may  want  to  partition your  multiplications  as major  and  minor.  Major  and  minor. If  you  do  that,  you  can  check  that  you  will be  able  to  get all  these  transformation  matric. K  in  each  of  these  transformation  matrix, they  must  be  one,  Join  variable. On  joint  variable.  And  here, you  can  see  that  cosine  the  one, this  is  cosine  two, this  is  cosine  D  three. Therefore,  they  are  functions of  order  joint  variables. If  you  multiply  this  t together  and  simplify  it, that  will  give  you  the  transformation  metric of  the  major  axis. The  is  respect  to  the  base. Because  the  robot  may be  designed  in  such  a  way that  only  the  minor  axis are  different  for  the  company. Therefore,  you  can  actually derive  this  one  so  that  you  don't  have to  keep  deriving  it  for the  remaining  models  with lesser  degree  of  freedoms  in  the  minor  axis. This  is  one  way  to  partition. After  that,  you  move  to  K  four  and calculate  For  transformations  of t  four,  with  respect  to  three. Lastly,  k  equal  to  five, give  you  the  transformations of  the  two  frame. Fifth  one  will  be  the  two  frame  with respect  to  the  previous  joint. This  two  will  be  the  minor  axis. As  I  said,  the  purpose  for this  one  is  to  go through  the  complete  process. Knowing  how  the  four  kinematics parameters  are  derived. After  that,  we  can  get  this  two. Again,  just  substitute  this  into  here, and  then  substitute  this  set  into  here. Simplifying  it.  Typically,  you just  with  the  help  of  calculators, you  can  actually  get  this transformation  matrixes and  multiply  them  together, give  you  the  transformation  matrix of  the  two  frames, with  respect  to  the  whiz. We  have  the  whi  respect  to  base, and  then  we  have  two  respect  to  whiz. Finally,  is  to  multiply  them  together. That  will  give  you  the  entire relationship  of  the  two  frame, with  respect  to  base  frame. And  the  final  matrix  will be  in  a  homogeneous  coordinate  form. You  need  to  partition  it  into this  form  in  order to  retrieve  the  fiscal  meaning. This  is  a  three  times  one, matrix  a  factor  which represent  the  translation. This  is  a  three  times  three  matrix. Which  represent  the  orientations of  the  two  frame  respect  to  the  base  string. Be  in  the  four  kinematics  model, we  have  substituted all  the  joint  angles  into  it. You  can  see  four  d  five. Finally,  if  you  multiply  them  together, there  will  be  a  functions of  all  the  joint  angles. The  last  matrix  is  derived  by multiplying  the  major  axis and  the  minor  axis  together, to  get  the  overall  transformation  matrix of  the  two  frame  with respect  to  the  bras  stam. As  I  said,  you  partition  it  into  this  form, as  to  retrieve  the  fiscal  meaning. This  will  be  the  translation. This  will  be  the  rotation. I  basically  means  that after  I  have  multiplied everything  together,  this  is  t01. This  is  t  one,  two, this  is  t  two, three,  this  is  wiz  respect  to  base. Then  after  that,  we  have  minor  axis. Three  to  four,  and  then  four  to  five. These  two  other  minor  axis. Multiply  everything  together,  give  you this  transformation  matrix  of  the  two  frame, which  is  fifth  frame  respect to  the  base  brain. This  is  the  two  frame  respect  to the  base  frame  has  functions  of  the  joint. The  meaning  of  this  Vector here  is  the  translation  of the  origin  of  the  two  frame with  respect  to  the  base  spring. This  is  translations  of  the  two  frame, with  respect  to  the  base  spring. This  is  basically  a  four  kinematic  model. Because  you  can  see  from  this  model that  given  joint  angles, given  the  one  d  2d3d4. We  can  calculate  the  translation. What  is  the  translation? The  translation  is  the  position  X  Y  Z. Of  the  robot.  This  is your  base  frame,  your  reference. Where  is  this  location  along  the  x  axis? Where  is  the  position  along  xs? Where  is  the  positions  with  respect  to  z, and  where  is  the  position  with  respect  to  y. All  this  can  be  now  calculated from  here  in  the  sense  that  this  is  x. Given  joint  angles,  calculate the  positions  of  the  Niftor  along  the  x  axis. Given  joint  angles, calculate  the  positions  along  the  y  axis, given  joint  angles  calculate  position along  the  z  axis. By  doing  so,  you  can  now  predict the  position  of  the  factors, S  functions  of  the  joint  variables. But  position  is  not  enough  because  in  order to  ask  the  robots  to  do  a  task, this  is  three  dimensional  space,  x  y  z. But  however,  you  also  have  orientation, rotation  about  x, rotation  about  y,  rotation  about  z. In  fact,  here  you  can  see  that  your  factor, the  approach  angle,  This  is  sliding. This  is  normal.  They  are captured  by  this  matrix  over  here. They  are  captured  by  this  matrix  over  here. And  how  it  works  is that  you  partition  into  this  form. There  are  three  vectors,  The  vectors. A  three  dimensional.  Three  vectors. The  first  vector  is  actually  x. The  second  vector  is  actually  y. The  third  vector  is  actually  z.  X,  Y,  z. Remember,  z  is  the  approach  diction. Y  is  the  sliding  direction, is  the  normal  direction. From  here,  actually  you  can  calculate the  approach  directions  of your  vector  as  functions of  the  joint  variable. From  this  vector,  you  can  actually calculate  the  sliding directions  of  your  gripper. How  you  align  your  gripper will  depends  on  these  directions. As  functions  of  joint  variable. Actually,  if  you  have  these two  is  already  enough, this  is  just  some  kind of  redundant  information. You  just  need  to  approach  and align  your  sliding  directions. Then  you  can  grab  anything. But  in  a  tree  dimensional  space, we  will  keep  all  the  information  over  here. This  is  basically  the  for  chinematics. Sometimes,  we  will  call  this  r  one. R  stand  four,  rotation. On  stand  four,  column  one. This  is  column  two,  this  is  column  three. But  remember,  the  fiscal  meaning  is  what  x  y, x  y  and  z.  X,  y, and  z  of  your  two  frame, respect  to  bas  spring. How  they  are  oriented as  functions  of  joint  variables, respect  to  the  bas  spring. Basically,  given  this,  we  can  then use  it  to  calculate  the  positions and  orientations  of  the  N  e  ftor. As  functions  of  the  joint  variable. That  means  that  if  you  know  this  model, given  any  angle,  maybe  this  is  30, and  this  is  50, and  this  is  zero, or  any  other  angles? Maybe  adjust  a  little  bit.  Negative  one,  12. This  one,  I'll  put  zero. Zero  and  zero. You  can  actually  predict the  position  and  the  orientation. Position  is  referring  to  where  is this  where  is  the  positions of  this  vector  over  here. Given  all  these  angles. An  angles,  not  just  this  angle. Given  any  angles,  you  can straightway  predict  where  is  the  position, and  where  is  the  orientation? Also  can  be  predicted. That  means  that  will be  the  approach  direction.  Right? Where  will  be  the  approach  directions? Where  will  be  the  sliding  directions? All  these  can  be  calculated  from the  forward  kinematics  model  over  here. Just  to  go  through  the  complete  step. For  forward  kinematics  modeling. We  will  go  through  another  example  because we  learn  by  repeating,  by  repeating. If  you  see the  first  time  it's  always  confusing, you  need  to  read  through  it, review  it,  and  then  practice  it  yourself. Do  not  just  look  at  all  these  examples. Go  back  to  try  to  derive everything  by  yourself. To  see  whether  you  can  get the  same  thing  or  not  or at  least  similar  thing  because DH  assignments  are  not  unique,  not  unique. You  may  have  answers different  by  plus  and  minus  typically. Now,  next,  we  are  given  a  robot. Here  we  show  you  the  actual pictures  of  the  robot. Given  this  robot  systems, first  thing  that  you  need  to  do  is  to try  to  identify  all  the  joint  angles. Over  here,  this  is  actually a  compartment  with  a  motel. Therefore,  there  is  a  rotational  axis. Over  here.  And  you  know  that this  will  be  your  Z  axis,  correct? This  will  be  your  Z  axis. And  here  there's  another  motor  compartment. So  this  is  another  z  axis. Another  z  axis.  Okay,  next, there's  this  prismatic  joint extending  up  and  down. This  robot  can  extend the  lin  length  right  up  and  down. This  is  the  third  joint. The  last  joint  is  this  rotation. The  first  three  joint  will  do  the  position. The  last  joint  will  do  the  orientation. This  robot  has  limited  degree  of  freedom. I  can  only  point  do  point  downward. I'll  show  you  the  animations  of  this  robot. This  is  the  first  joint. First  joint.  I  rotate respect  to  a  vertical  axis. Remember  this  one,  this  will  be your  z  zero,  correct? You  will  be  your  z  zero. How  about  x  and  y?  No  restriction. Maybe  you  want  to  call  this  x  up  to  you. Maybe  you  want  to  call  this  x  up  to  you. So  long  as  you  assign  it  properly, after  that,  fix  it,  and  all  the  users. I'm  talking  about  the  perspective of  a  robotics  engineer. You  design  this  and  user will  follow.  This  will  be  X. If  you  assign  this  x,  then all  the  users  will  say  that this  X  directions, and  this  block  is  located at  a  certain  distance. Along  the  x  axis, a  certain  distance  along  the  y  axis, z  axis  will  be  upward. So  this  is  first  step. Second  step  is  to  find the  next  joint  axis  will  be  this  axis. You  must  imagine  that  is  rotating respect  to  this  axis, also  vertically  upwards. These  two  joint  axis are  parallel,  right?  Parallel. Next,  Joint  three  is actually  a  joint  four  here. It  should  be  joint  three. It  is  a  prismatic  joint, which  can  extend  up  or  down.  Up  or  down. Here  you  can  see  that  by  rotating  joint  one, Joint  two,  and  Joint  three, basically  you  can  control the  position  in  a  three  dimensional  space. But  that  is  not  enough because  if  there's  a  gripper  here, you  may  want  to  align  it  with the  flat  surface  of  the  part. This  is  joint  four, which  is  joint  three  here. I  may  not  be  very  obvious, but  you  can  see  that  the blue  part  is  rotating. That  means  it  is  rot  this  way. I  back  to  this  one,  you'll  be  cleared  down. This  is  exactly  this  robot where  you  can  rotate  joint  one,  joint  two, and  prismatic  joint,  translate  it to  positions  your  n  ftor. After  that,  you  need  to  rotate  this  n  ftor  by another  joint  D  four. D  one,  D  two, D  three,  prismatic,  and  theta  four. All  these  other  joint  axis. In  the  next  few  slide, I'm  just  trying  to  explain how  we  derive  from  this  diagram. And  you  should  start  from  scratch. Do  not  just  read, as  I  said,  derive, see  whether  you  can  dive something  similar  or  not. This  is  what  we'll  do. For  this  example,  we'll go  through  all  the  steps  again. D  representation, kinematics,  parameters,  spine, transformations,  then  multiply  them  together, starting  from  DH  representation. Now,  DH  representation  says that  go  to  the  first  joint. Identify  the  joint  axis, assigned  S  z  zero. Assign  as  zero. How  about  x  and  y? Not  stated,  correct? Not  stated  means  what, you  can  assign  them  freely, according  to  right  hand. One  guideline  only,  zero is  the  rotational  axis  of  joint  one. Then  you  move  on  to  the  next  joint. And  identify  the  joint  axis. Easy  to  remember.  All  the  joint  axis are  the  z  axis. You  go  to  the  robot  again. Remember  that  this  is join  rotation  axis  of  D  one.  Joint  one. Therefore,  your  z  axis  is either  this  way  or  this  way.  Correct? Even  spring  is  not  unique. But  it  makes  sense  to  assign  it  upward. This  means  that  everything  above, the  floor  will  be  positive. Everything  downward  will  be negative.  If  you  assign. If  you  assign  downward,  it means  that  everything  in  your  workspace, will  have  to  deal  with  negative  coordinates of  the  z  axis. Usually  all  robots  will assign  upward.  Assign  upward. Now,  after  that, assign  x  and  y  for  your  base  spring. Basep  you  can  assign  first  X  and  Y. How  do  you  assign  right  hand  rules. It's  up  to  you  to  assign  x  or  y. You  can  also  assign  this  way, if  you  want  this  to  be  X  also  fine. Then  this  will  be  Y. So  long  as  it's  specified  right  hand  rules. It's  not  unique.  Once  it's assigned  stick  it  sticks. Later  on,  the  user  will  know, which  one  will  be  x, which  one  will  be,  y, which  one  will  be,  z. We  move  on  to  the  next  axis. Is  this  rotation  axis, which  I'll  show  it  to  you  just  now. Again,  there  are  two  possibilities. One  is,  one  is dowd  or  downward,  both  are  fine. I'll  follow  the  textbook. Downward.  When  you  assign  downward, it  basically  means  that  you assign  the  directions  of  rotation. Whether  which  direction  is  positive, which  direction  is  negative. By  assigning  z,  correct? After  that,  you  are  saying that  these  directions  will  be  positive. This  rotation  direction  will  be  positive. Okay,  next,  we  move  on  to  the  next  joint. Okay.  Remember  that  the  next  joint is  a  prismatic  joint. You  will  translate  up  and  down,  up  and  down. In  this  case,  it  is  straightforward,  right? It  means  that  your  z  two  can be  either  up  or  down. Either  up  or  down.  Both  are  fine. Both  are  fine. So  here  I  will  just  put  downward. Now,  after  that,  move  on  to  the  next  joint. The  last  joint  is actually  a  rotational  angle. Remember  that  is  suppose there's  a  cripple  here. Then  you  need  to  rotate  this  cripple, Rotate  this  cripple. So  you  need  something  here  to  rotate  it. To  rotate  that,  it means  that  this  is  your  joint  axis, either  again  either  downward or  upward,  downward  upward. This  one,  you  can either  put  it  downward  or  upward. Now,  these  are  all  the  joint  axis, where  you  just  plot  it at  the  kind  of  physical  location, of  the  motto,  for  example. And  then  this  one  just  put  it  here. After  that,  you'll  start  to  find the  origin  of  the  next  spring. Right?  Origin  of  the  next  spring. And  by  the  way,  right  before  that, for  the  two  frames, Once  you  reach  the  last  joint, the  next  one  will  be  the  two  frame. For  the  two  frames,  follow  this  rule, which  you  can  find  over  here. Not  so  obvious,  but  it's  actually  here. The  last  steps  of  your  DH  algorithm. It  says  that  align  with  the  approach, align  y  with  the  sliding, align  with  the  normal. X  is  perpendicular  to both  y  and  z  according  to  right  hand  rules. Go  back  to  here,  you  see  that if  you  draw  your  griper  this  way, you  must  draw  a  griper  there. If  you  draw  a  gripper  this  way, then  this  will  be  z,  and this  will  be  a  y  sliding. It  can  be  this  way  also,  correct? It  can  be  this  way  also. Both  are  fine.  The  z  has  only  one  direction. It  must  be  the  approach  direction. That  means  if  you  draw  a  gripper  this  way, this  will  be  a  approach. Sliding  can  be  two  ways. Once  you  choose  one  of  them, x  should  be  perpendicular  to both  according  to  right  hand  rules. There's  this  clause  at the  end  of  the  DH  agree. Do  I  pay  attention  to  that. Next,  we  shall  just find  the  intersections  of  all  the  z  axis. That  will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  frame. If  they  do  not  intercept, then  find  the  intersections  of the  z  with  a  common  normal, between  the  z  axis. After  you  identified  the  origins, you  identified  x,  which  is  per  picar  to. It's  very  easy  to  remember, do  all  the  z  first. Using  z,  you  identify the  origin  as  well  as  the  x. After  that,  y  is  just  right  hand  role. This  is  what  we  will  do  next. We  will  now  start  to  extend  all  the  z, starting  from  here  and  here. You  see  that  sometimes  they  are  parallel, which  means  but  they  do  not interst  That's  why  there's  this  cross  here. If  they  do  not  interst  then the  intersections  of  the  current  z  exist, which  you  are  trying  to  origin, with  a  common  normal  with  a  common  normal, which  is  this  line  over  here will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  ring. That  means  you  just  d  join  at the  fiscal  locations  of your  joint  in  this  case, which  is  this  compartment  over  here. This  is  the  joint  axis. There  is  another  joint  axis. There  is  a  common  normal  between  them. After  that,  should  be  perpendicular  to  both. Correct?  And  you  point X  away  from  z,  z  is  here. Sorry,  the  previous  joints here,  you  point  away. Just  point  away  from  the  previous  grain. And  along  the  common  normal. That  is  still  perpendicular  to  both. X  is  always  perpendicular. And  y  comes  out  naturally  from  right  hand. After  that,  we  see  that  this  z and  this  z  is  also  para. This  give  you  a  common  normal. The  intersections  of  this  common normal  with  this  z  axis, give  you  the  origin  of  the  next  spring. And  point  x  away  from the  previous  joint  along  the  common  normal. This  one,  you  can  only  point  this  way. You  cannot  point  the  other  way  around, because  there's  this  cross here  saying  that  you  point  away. After  that,  we  go  to  this  z  and  this  z. If  you  extend  them, you'll  see  that  they  intercept everywhere,  along  this  line. Again,  if  you  extend  them, the  intercept  everywhere  because  they are  basically  right  along  the  same  line. This  basically  means  that  you can  put  the  origin at  anywhere  along  that  line,  right? Anywhere  along  that  line. For  example,  if  you  want  to  put  here, then  there's  no  translation between  them,  right? But  if  you  do  that, it  will  be  quite  messy. Usually,  what  you  should do  is  that  you  should place  it  at  this  location. Just  before  the  factor  because  this is  your  factors  where  for  robot, you  need  to  change the  tools  quite  frequently. Sometimes  you  change  it  to  ripper. Sometimes  you  change  it  to  grinding  tools. Sometimes  you  change  it  to  polishing tools  for  different  tasks. Usually,  we  will  partition  it  at  this  point. So  that  this  can  be  changed. This  can  be  changed.  Here,  I  will just  put  it  at  this  location. Later  on,  you'll  see  that  by  doing  so, you  can  also  derive your  kinematics  parameters  more  easily. But  you're  not  wrong  if  you  put  it  at any  location  such  as  putting  here. It's  just  that  your  kinematic  parameters will  be  different. Actually,  we  put  it  at  this  location, mainly  because  this  then will  be  joint  distance. This  D,  the  physical distance  from  here  to  here, will  be  mi  joint  distance, which  is  a  variable. For  this  joint,  is  prismatic  joint. Joint  distance  become  your  joint  variable. Revue  joint,  Rtation  is  your  variable. R  rotate. Revenue,  prismatic. If  I  place  it  at  that  location, so  sometime  you  work backward,  you  praise  wrongly, you  see  that  it's  very difficult  to  define  your  translation, then  you  just  place  it  again. I'll  place  it  over  there  and  after  that, I  will  put  x  perpendicular  to  z. Perpendicular  z.  You  can  see  for  here. You  can  put  it  anywhere. Because  if  you  have  a  line, suppose  that  you  have  a  line. Perpendicular  means  what  anywhere. Along  this.  This  is perple,  this  is  also  perpendicular, this  is  perpendicular,  this  is also  perpendicular,  draw  anywhere. You  draw  it  this  way  or  this  way. Also  fine,  you  draw  this  way,  it's  also  fine. Right?  Because  your  theta  four  is  angle. Basically,  you  can  rotate. You're  just  sketching  it  at a  particular  angle  the  four. In  this  case,  I'm  sketching  it  at a  particular  angle  of  the four  equal  to  zero,  correct? The  four  is  equal  to  zero. Once  you  reach the  last  joint,  which  is  the  four, take  note  that  this  one,  You do  not  follow  this  anymore. There's  no  more  joint. You  put  this  as  the  approach. This  one  as  a  sliding, and  this  is  the  normal  vectors according  to  the  fiscal  meaning. That's  how  we  assign the  coordinates,  using  DH  algorithm. Once  you  do  it  a  few  times, you'll  be  less  difficult. We  have  obtained  the  DH  diagram. Next,  you  use  this  DH  diagram to  derive  the  kinematic  parameters. Derive  the  kinematic  parameters, because the  kinematic  parameters  basically  tells you  the  transformations  between each  of  the  coordinates, because,  translate,  translate,  and  rotate. Next  step  is  to  define  it  and  there  are two  ways  to  get the  four  kinematic  parameters. One  is  to  use  this  definition. Joint  parameters. Are  the  relationship  between  x,  respect  to  z. Joint  angle  is  the  rotation, and  joint  distance  is  the  translation. After  that,  there's two  more  parameters,  link  parameters. This  will  be  the  other  way  around. Z  respect  to  x, x  respect  to  z, z,  respect  to  x. The  first  one,  as  I  said,  is  to  align  x. With  respect  to  z. The  next  two  is  to  align  Z. With  respect  to  X. Then  you  can  know the  relationship  between  them. This  is  the  basic  definitions, which  I  think  you  need  not  remember, if  if  you  understand the  physical  meaning  of  the  joy  parameters. Now,  when  you  start, the  table  will  be  empty. Don't  just  read  because  you  need  to  learn  how to  fill  out  this  table  by  yourself. Go  back  to  try  all  the  examples. I  will  also  pose  some  examples, some  exercise  for  you to  do  so  that you  can  understand  the  complete  process. I  just  use  one  robot  for  you to  derive  all  the  kinematics, inverse  kinematics,  et  cetera. Let's  return  to  these  examples. Starting  from  a  blank  table, you  know  that  there  are  four  joints,  right? So  one,  two,  three,  four. Four  joints,  four  sets of  kinematics  parameter. Remember  that  five  joints, five  sets  of  kinematics  parameter, six,  six  set  seven,  seven  set,  right? Firstly,  feel  order  variable. This  is  a  revenue  join,  first  joint, revenue  join,  second  join,  revenue  join. Third  join, remember  prismatic  joint,  correct? Prismatic  joint.  You  go  to  the  next  one. This  one.  Re  revenue, prismatic.  Last  one,  Revenue. Hey,  you  don't  have  to know  what  is  the  angle? Maybe  t10,  no  need  to  know. The  two,  maybe  90  degree. Also,  no  need  to  put. Just  put  a  variable y  because  you  want  to  derive a  general  formula  so  that  given  the  12d3, you  will  be  able  to use  this  model  to  calculate the  position  and  orientation. But  however,  if  you  put  D  three  here, maybe  it's  quite  confusing,  right? Suppose  that  you  have  d  one,  d two,  D  four,  suppose. Then  you  do  not  really  know, which  one  is  the  constant, which  one  is  the  variable,  correct? Therefore,  usually,  in  this  situation, you  should  define  them  as,  three, four,  K  one,  two,  three,  four. That  means  Q  one  is  the  one. Two  is  T  two,  three  is  D  three, and  then  four  is  dt  four. That  here,  even  if  you  have  D  one,  D  two, d  d  d  four, it  is  quite  clear  that  D  three  is  a  variable. D  three,  D  three  is  a  variable. And  then  D  one,  D  two, d  four  are  constant,  right? So  this  is  just  a  notation, right  not  worry  too  much. You  can  define  D  three  if  you  want. I  other  parameters  are  constant. For  example,  if  this  is  0.5, this  is  0.4,  this  is  0.6, it's  very  clear  that  D  three  is  a  variable. But  sometimes  the  company  will dive  The  kinematic  model for  a  family  of  robots, that  means  robot  with  different  dimensions, but  same  kinematic  structures. Therefore,  it's  useful  to  put  it  this  way. We  have  theta  one,  theta  two. SQ  one,  two,  and  D  three SQ  three,  four,  SQ  four. This  is  our  DH  diagram. After  that,  we  will  use  it to  identify  the  other  kinematics  parameter. This  one  you  fill  up  first,  correct? Then  you  need  to  fill  up  the  others  3%. Which  means  that  you  only need  to  identify  three. Let's  start  from  first  one. Currently,  you  can  see  that  your  x zero  and  x  one,  they  are  parallel. This  means  that  you  sketch  it  at equal  to  zero.  One  equal  to  zero. Actually,  you  can  also sketch  it  this  way  if  you  want. Because  there's  a  joint  angle, Jo  angle,  but  you  cannot  sketch  it. There's  nothing  to  rotate  here. Nothing  to  rotate  here. In  fact,  you  saw  the  robot  just  now. You  cannot  move  upwards. You  must  follow  the  fiscal  constraint  and take  into  consideration  the  degree of  freedom  that  you  have  by  the  joint. If  you  draw  this  way,  your  joint  angle one  will  be  zero. If  you  draw  the  other  way  round, your  joint  angle  one  will  be 180  degree,  180  degree. But  you  don't  put  zero. You  don't  put  180  degree. You  put  Q  one  because you  want  the  general  model. Please  don't  go  and  put  zero. Just  put  Q.  After  that, we  will  move  on  to  d  one. As  I  said,  don't  put  Q  one  equal  to  zero. Put  Q  one.  Move  on  to  D  one. Here,  in  order  to align  your  x,  one  of  them  is  here, one  of  them  is  there,  and you  can  see  that  you  need  to  go up  by  a  distance  of  D  one.  Correct. This  is  the  physical  meaning  of  D  one. You  move  upward  by  a  distance  off  D  one. Now,  this  is  an  example where  you  have  two  translation. In  the  past,  there was  only  one  translation,  correct? This  one  has  two  because  after this  move  upward, after  this  move  upward, you  can  see  that  your  z  is  here, but  you  want  to  move  it  to  this  location. Which  means  that  you  still  need  to  translate, translate  by  A  one. Along  x  axis. By  here,  you  can  see  that x  is  already  aligned. Therefore,  whether  x3x4,  it  doesn't  matter, but  here  we  take  reference  to  x  four. The  next  one  will  be  Press. The  next  one  will  be  translate. Let's  do  it  again. Translate  along  x  to  align z  by  a  translations  of  A  one. When  you  reach  this  location, you  can  see  that  Z  still  need  to rotate  by  180  degree,  correct? 180  degree.  That  means, you  need  to  rotate  downward  in  order  to move  to  the  new  location. So  if  it's  180  degree, no  need  to  worry  about  the  sign. Whether  you  put  positive  or  negative, it  will  be  the  same,  correct? If  you're  facing  one  direction, whether  you  rotate  clockwise, and  the  clockwise,  so  long  as  you  rotate 180  degree,  you'll  face  backward. So  you  don't  need  to  worry  about  the  sign. Just  put  positive  or  negative. Both  are  correct.  Then  they  will  be  align. That  means  that  you  just  imagine  how a  frame  will  move  from this  location  to  this  location. You  will  rotate,  translate,  translate, and  rotate  before  they  are  aligned. As  I  said,  rather  than  driving four  fundamental homogeneous  transformation  matrixes and  multiply  them  together, each  time,  we  have derived  a  general  one  so  that  we  just plug  in  these  kinematic  parameters to  calculate  the  particular  one. This  is  joint  one. Let's  move  on  to  joint  two. Now,  for  your  information, we  are  sketching  it  at  joint  two  equal to  zero  x,  align. X  are  align,  meaning  that  we  are sketching  it  at  joint  two  equal  to  zero. But  as  I  said,  do  not  put  zero, do  not  put  zero,  just  put  two. After  that,  take  note  that  x at  this  stage  is  already  on  the  same  line. There's  no  more  displacement needed  as  far  as  z  is  concerned. This  explain  why  this is  zero  over  here,  correct? We  need  not  have  any  displacement along  the  z  axis  anymore  in  order  to  align  x. If  one  of  them  is, if  this  is  upward,  I suppose  that  is  a  physical  displacement. You  need  to  translate.  You  need to  translate  downward,  first. This  will  become  your  joint  distance. But  in  this  case,  right? They  are  aligned.  They  are  aligned. Maybe  I'll  just  show  you  over  here. This  is  not  exactly  this  one. This  this  link  is  actually  here. Right? You  must  imagine this  link  is  actually  downward. Okay?  If  there's  there's  a  upset, right,  then  that  would  be  your  distance. But  for  this  case,  it's  aligned,  right? Imagine  this  is  down right?  Parel  with  this  one. So  it  depends  on  whether there's  any  offset  or  not, if  there's  an  offset,  you  have  to take  that  into  consideration. And  after  that,  we  need  to  align  z. Z  here, and  you  need  to  translate by  a  distance  of  A  two,  correct? Translate  by  a  distance  of  A  two. So  this  explain  this  parameter  over  here, translate  a  distance  of  A  two, and  after  you  translate, you  can  see  that  the  z  has  already  aligned. No  rotation  is  required. So  you  get  a  zero  over  here. Now,  suppose  that  here  you  draw it  because  it's  not  unique,  correct? You  draw  it  upwards. Then  when  you  reach  here, If  this  is  downward,  then  you  need to  rotate  by  180  degree. Typically,  if  you  check  your  friends, the  answer  will  be  different  by zero,  Pi,  plus  minus. A  are  correct  because  it's  not  unique. The  next  set  of  kinematics  parames it  will  be  a  prismatic  joint,  right? Remember  this  is  a  prismatic  joint. Here,  we  draw  it  at this  particular  configuration  where Q  is  equal  to  a  fixed  length. But  three  is  a  variable. It  can  extend  up  and  down,  up  and  down. As  I  said,  first  put  here, then  fill  up  the  rest. If  you  look  at the  X  axis  indicated  by  blue  line, because  I  draw  it  this  way, my  x  is  equal  to  zero. Because  this  is  a  variable, this  become  a  constant. Be  careful.  This  is  a  variable, this  become  a  constant. Now,  if  you  draw  it  this  way, because  it's  not  unique,  then you  become  180  degree, which  is  a  constant  also. Right?  If  you  draw  this  direction, then  become  90  degree and  it  is  also  a  constant. It  depends  on  where  you  draw  it. Again,  because  it's  not  unique. Here,  I'll  simply  do  it  this way  to  make  my  kinematic  parameter  simpler. That  means  equal  to  zero. At  the  same  time.  Remember,  I say  that  you  praise  your  coordinates  here. Then  the  distance  between  this  will  become. Joint  distance,  the  variable, correct?  The  variable. So  that  your  Q  tree, will  appear  as  the  kinematics parameters  of  joint  three. Next  is  to  note that  after  you  translate  by  Q  three, Q  three  is  available. After  you  translate  by  Q  three, there's  no  more  translation, no  more  rotation. You  get  zero  and  zero. In  this  case,  what  we  need  is just  a  translation  of Q  three  along  the  z  axis. After  that,  everything  is  aligned. We  need  not  do  any  more  transformation. The  last  one  would  be  the  last  joint, which  is  the  relationship  between  these  two. Q  four  is  variable. Currently,  currently, your  x  axis  is  90  degree. That's  because  you  draw  it  this  way, but  Q  four  is  a  variable. Actually,  currently,  Currently, x  the  two  x  xs are  making  an  angle  of  90  degree. 90  degree,  respect  to  x. That  means  that  if you  rotate  it  by  90  degree, which  is  your  joint  angle, then  you  align  x,  correct? A  after  you  turn  it  by  90  degree, you  need  to  translate  by  D  four. Translate  by  B  four. After  you  translate  by  D  four, then  they  are  already  aligned. Therefore,  no  more  translation, no  more  rotation. Again,  don't  put  this  as  90, 90  means  I  draw  it, I  draw  it  at  90  degree. You  can  also  draw  it  at  zero  degree or  other  angles. But  to  derive  the  kinematics  model, we  put  four  as a  general  term  that  given  Q  one, two,  three,  and  four. You  can  find  the  positions and  the  orientations,  right? You  must  put  a  general  input. So  as  to  get  a  general  output,  right? Next  is  to  use  this  four  sets  of kinematics  parameters  to  calculate the  link  coordinate  transformation. And  we  have  derived  a  general  one, that  given  any  kinematic  parameters, we  can  calculate  the  transformation  matrix from  one  frame  to  another without  having  to  multiply the  matrices  four  times  in  each  calculation. We'll  just  make  use  of  this to  find  the  transformation  matrices. This  is  just  substitution. Substitute  this  kinematic  parameters into  this  matrix  k  equal  to  one. Then  simplifying  it,  you'll  get first  frame  respect  to base  frame,  which  is  this  one. Next,  you  can  also substitute  into  the  subsequent  one. Maybe  I  just  run  through  the  first  one. This  is  what  you  do.  You  put  k  equal  to  zero. K  equal  to  one.  Put  this  one,  put  this  zero. Put  everything  with  k  equal  to  one. After  that,  D  one  is  constant. M  for  this  company, maybe,  you  will  have  three  models, 0.2,  0.3,  and  0.4,  different  dimension. Depending  on  the  applications  of  the  users. Usually,  we  put  a  general  term, for  each  model,  we  substitute the  physical  parameters  into  it. Same  thing,  A  one,  Maybe  it  will  be 0.3  0.5  0.6,  just  for  illustration. Then  you  can  get  three, models  with  different  sizes. Finally,  Alpha  one  is  Pi.  This  is  here. Calcine  Pi,  using  calcine  Pi, using  calculators,  you reduce  to  one  and  zero. This  basically  give  you a  particular  transformation  matrix, which  is  this  one  over  here. This  is  from  first  sets of  kinematics  parameters. Then  you  move  on  to the  second  set  of  kinematics  parameters, similarly,  put  Q  two  as  a  general  one, put  d  one  equal  to  zero. This  is  a  general dimension,  but  it's  constant, can  be  0.5  0.4, et  cetera,  and  Alpha  one  is  equal  to  zero. Put  into  the  general  transformation  matrix, and  then  you  can  get  two  respect  to  one. After  that,  we  move  on  similarly, D  one  is  now  equal  to  zero. Then  D  three  is  a  variable  Q  three. A  three  is  equal  to  zero, and  Alpha  three  is  also  equal  to  zero. This  is  a  very  simple  one because  a  lot  of  zeros, zeros  will  simplify  your transformation  metric  significantly. This  is  the  third  frame with  respect  to  second  frame. There  are  only  four  joints. The  last  one  will  be  fourth  joint, which  is  two  frame, with  respect  to  the  f, which  is  your  iz,  and multiplying  them  altogether. In  this  case,  you  can multiply  altogether  because  the minor  axis  only  one. These  are  the  major  axis. This  is  a  minor.  You  can only  do  rotation  of  your  factor. You  multiply  everything  together, then  you'll  be  able  to get  one  transformation  matrix of  the  final  frame, which  is  fourth  frame  with  respect to  zero  frame,  which  is  base  frame. So  we  have  this  transformation  matrix after  multiplying  everything  together. What  does  it  give  you?  It  basically  give  you the  relationship  of  the  two  frame with  respect  to  the  base  frame. And  how  this  two  frame is  related  to  your  base  frame. It  will  be  obtained  by the  final  transformation  matrix. This  is  how  it  looks  like  after multiplying  everything  together, and  we  should  always partition  it  into  this  form. To  obtain  the  physical  meaning. Namely,  that  will  be  the  x  y  z, respect  to  bass  spring. Where  is  x  y  z  of  your  tor, with  respect  to  the  bas  spring. Orientations  is  described  by partition  this  rotational  transformation into  three  vectors. Three  vector.  Each  one  is three  dimensional.  Three  dimensional. Over  here,  we  can  see  that this  one  will  be  the  approach. This  will  be  the  sliding, this  will  be  the  normal  direction. In  short,  this  will  be  the  position  of the  any  factor  respect  to the  base  frame  as  functions  of  joint  angle. That  given  joint  angle  one, given  joint  angle  two,  by  the  way, c  one  minus  two  means  Q  one  minus  Q  two. Conse  Q  one  minus  Q  two. And  similarly  sign,  one  minus two  means  sine  Q  one  minus  Q  two. This  is  just  a  short  node  in order  to  simplify  the  notation. Given  join  angle  one  joiner  two, I  can  use  the  first  equation  to  calculate  x. Given  join  le  one  joiner  two, I  can  use  the  second  equation to  calculate  the  y  positions, and  the  third  one  basically  give you  the  z  position. Give  you  the  z  position. In  fact,  the  z  position is  quite  straightforward. You  can  actually  obtain  it by  inspection  because  z is  z  is  here.  This  is  actually  z. Where  is  the  positions  of your  nu  factor  respect  to  the  base? That  means  how  far  is  it  away  from  the  four? You  can  see  that  to  get  z, you  use  D  one  minus away  this  distance,  which  is  a  variable. You  lin  length  and  extend. Minus  away  this  d,  which  is  fixed. This  is  your  grip  the  length of  your  grip  is  a  fixed  length. I  say  again,  D  one  minus  away  Q minus  away  D  three  will  give  you  z, which  is  what  this  means. Z  is  actually  d  one, minus  away  Q  three  avariable. That  will  be  changing.  That  means  that  as  Q three  is  changing  is  changing. Given,  you  can  find  z. Given  what  is  the  length  of Q,  you  can  find  z. Next,  we  have  this rotational  matrix  over  here, which  you  should  partition into  this  three  vectors. Each  of  them  has  different  meaning. Suppose  that  I  multiply  this  matrix  by  10, zero,  y  is  100? 100  is  x  axis, correct?  That  means  this  one. This  means  that  if  you  are at  this  mobile  frame, you  look  at  this  tip  of  the  x  axis, you'll  be  always  100. This  is  mobile.  If  you  want  to find  out  what  is  it respect  to  the  fixed  frame, which  is  your  base  frame, Correct?  Then  you  need  to multiply  by  this  rotational  transformation. If  you  multiply  them, you'll  see  that  you'll get  the  first  column,  correct? Get  the  first  column  because  you multiply  this.  You  get  this  one. This  one  will  mean  by  zero,  mean  by  zero. Same  thing,  you'll  always multiply  by  the  first  element  only, the  others  will  be  multiplied  by  zero. Which  means  that  R  one  is actually  the  orientations  of your  x  axis  attached  to  the  mobile  frame, express  as  your  reference  ring, as  functions  of  the  joint  variables. In  this  case,  will  be  Q  one, Q  two  and  Q  four  because  this means  sine  Q  minus  Q  two  minus  f. This  is  sine  Q  minus  two  minus  Q  four. Next,  this  vector  is  respect  to  y  axis, because  if  you  multiply  by  zero,  one, zero,  You'll  get  this  one. Lastly,  if  we  multiply  by  zero,  zero,  one, you  will  get  this  only. Notice  that  the  last column  is  a  fixed  vector, as  column  is  a  fixed  vector. Is  independent  independence of  the  joint  angles. That's  because  this  robot has  limited  degree  of  freedom. You  can  see  that  no  matter  how I  change  my  joint  angles. You  can  see  that  it's always  pointing  downward. This  is  fixed,  right? Is  fixed  direction. Even  if  I  change  this  one, Also  point  downward,  point  downward. And  even  if  you  change  D  four, theta  four  is  this  one  up  and  down, it's  still  pointing  downward. It's  just  that  the  length  is  changing. This  four,  Theta  four  also  does  not  change it,  because  it's  rotating. Rotating  with  respect  to  that. That  means  all  the  joint  angle do  not  really  change  this  direction. You  go  back  to  here,  you'll  see that  it  does  not really  change  this  direction. It's  always  pointing  downward. I  say  again,  this  z four  will  be  always  pointing  downward, no  matter  how  you  change  your one,  two,  three,  four. That  means  independent, which  explain  why  we  get  this  one  here. Next  is  zero,  zero,  negative  one? Actually,  that's  because  your  z  here  is  001. Right?  X  is  one,  zero,  zero, y  is  zero,  one,  zero.  Unit  vectors. There  are  unit  vectors  along  the  x  axis, y  axis,  and  z  axis. Therefore,  z  is  001, and  this  is  negative  of  z  zero. Zero  is  a  reference. This  is  the  other  way  around. Therefore,  you  have  negative, negative  001  would  be  00,  negative  one. This  can  roughly,  tells  you  whether  you  have derived  correctly  or  not because  if  you  look  at  the  robots, and  then  try  to  understand whether  is  it  dependent  on  which  joints? You  can  roughly  check  whether you  have  got  the  correct  answer  or  not. We  partition  it  into  this  form,  r  one, x,  r  two,  Column  two,  that  means  y, and  r  three  will  be  z.  R  one, R  two,  R  three,  R  1r2r3,  x  y,  z. This  basically  tells  you the  relationship  of  the  positions  and orientations  of  the  factor  respect to  the  base  frame, has  functions  of  the  joint  variables. The  last  example  is  just  Illustration, given  that  one  equal  to  Pi  over  four, given  equal  to  negative  Pi over  three,  given  Q  three, which  is  a  prismatic  joint, 120  M, and  then  Q  four  is  equal  to  Pi  over  two. I  want  you  to  calculate the  position,  calculate  the  position. J  sub  into  the  position.  That  means  this  one. The  sub  into  here, Calcrate  x,  y  n  z, and  you  can  go  calc  the  orientation, r  one,  r  two  in  this  configuration. Finally,  after  you  multiply, if  you're  not  sure  whether you  have  multiplied  correctly  or  not. One  thing  is  to  take  note that  these  are  all  unit  vector. These  are  all  unit  vector because  you  multiply by  10,  zero,  which  is  x, you  transform  it  into representation  with  respect  to  base, but  they  are  still  unit  vector is  just  that  they  are  oriented. Therefore,  you  can  see  that if  you  look  at  all  these  three  vectors, this  is  a  unit  vector,  this  is  very  obvious. This  one  is  also  a  unit  vector  because  y  sine square  plus  cosine  square  is  equal  to one  square  of  this  p  square of  this  plus  square  of  this  is  the  manitue. Then  you  take  square  root. Would  be  the  length of  the  vectors.  Is  equal  to  one. This  is  also  equal  to  one. That's  one  way  to  check. If  you  have  multiplied  wrongly, that  means  make  callss  mistake, in  the  end,  you  may  end  up with  a  non  unit  vector, which  means  that there's  cass  mistake  somewhere. This  is  how  we  can  check. Okay. So  let  us  stop  here  for  a  break,  right? Because  we  have  completed the  topics  of  forward  kinematics. And  we  will  take a  break  for  15  minutes  as  usual. So  please  come  back  at  8:25,  right? And  then  we  will  start  another  topic called  inverse  kinematics. Welcome  back.  We  have  completed the  topics  of  dir  kinematics or  forward  kinematics. He  recall  that  forward  kinematics  is to  models  and  equation. So  that  given  the  joint  angle, you  can  find  the  position  and orientations  of  the  Efectors. The  purpose  of  driving the  forward  kinematics  model  is actually  to  solve the  inverse  kinematic  problem. Because  in the  robotic  task,  we  do  the  reverse. Given  the  task,  you're going  to  find  out  the  joint  angles, as  to  achieve  the  task. This  means  inverse  kinematics, given  the  desired  position, maybe  a  location  of  a  part. So  given  X  Y  Z  position  of  the  part, and  given  the  orientation, given  how  you  want  to  approach  the  part, given  how  you  want  to  orientate  your  gripper, R  two  and  R  three. How  do  we  command  the  robots  to  pick up  the  part  at  this  location,  X  Y  Z? And  a  certain  orientation. That  means  given  the  location, given  the  orientation,  what  are the  joint  anchors  to  achieve  this? This  is  the  objective. Let  me  show  you  the  animation. Now,  this  robot  need  to  track this  circular  and  straight  lines as  specified  by  the  orange  frame. In  order  to  do  so,  you can  see  that  you  need  to know  what  are  the joint  angles  one,  two,  three,  four, five,  six,  if  you  have  six joints  so  that  you  can exactly  position  at  that  desired  position. In  a  sense  that  given  that  task, you  need  to  find  this  joint  angles as  functions  of  the  tusk, this  task  is  not  fixed. At  a  certain  time  is  at  a  certain  location. This  basically  means  that  you  need  to find  the  joint  trajectory  continuously, by  solving  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. I  say  again,  given  the  task, given  the  desired  position  and  orientation, what  are  the  joint  configuration? Now,  human  do  not  have  this  problem because  we  just  reach  out  very easily  using  vision  feedback to  reach  for  the  desired  position. Robot  is  a  low  level  machine. You  must  tell  it  exactly  what  to  do. In  order  to  reach  for  that  position, what  should  be  all  the  joint  angles so  that  it  can  reach  for  that  position? Therefore,  we  first  need to  model  the  forward  kinematic  model. The  purpose  of  model  forward  kinematics  model is  actually  to  solve the  inverse  kinematic  problem. You  first  model  the direct  kinematics  equation, then  you  solve  the  inverse kinematics  problem, using  the  forward  kinematic  equation. For  example,  suppose  that you  want  to  command the  robots  to  pick  up  this  part. Firstly,  you  must  know  where  are the  location,  X  Y  Z. Respect  to  the  base  stream. He  secondly,  you  must  also specify  what  is  the  approach  direction? What  is  the  sliding  direction? So  that  you  can  design  a  controller  to command  the  robot  to  pick  up  the  parts. In  a  sense  that  you  must  align  your  gripper, for  instance,  to  be aligned  with  the  flat  surface. Otherwise,  it  may  not  be  a  stable  cracks. In  order  to  do  this  task, you  need  to  tell  the  robot, what  is  joining  the  one? Why  is  joining  the  two, W  he's  joining  the  three, W  he's  joining  the  four, five,  six,  et  cetera  depending  on how  many  degree  of  freedom  that  you have  so  that  you  can  pick  up  this  part. Given  given  a  certain  task, in  terms  of  position  and  orientation,  fine. Or  the  joint  angles.  This  is  reverse. For  kinematics  means  but  given  joint  angles, find  the  position  and  orientation. Inverse  kinematics  given the  position  and  orientation, a  specific  object  that you  want  to  pick  it  up. Find  out  what  are  the  joint  angles to  reach  for  this  task. Because  as  I  said, robot  is  a  low  level  machine. Therefore,  we  need  to  model this  kinematic  equation  and  use it  to  solve  the  inverse  kinematic  problem. This  is  what  we'll  do in  the  remaining  part  of this  lecture  as  well as  beginning  of  next  week  lecture. And  we  basically  need to  find  the  joint  angle. We  specify  the  forward  kinematics  equation, given  a  certain  desired  position and  orientation. Let  me  use  a  simplest  examples to  illustrate  this  concept  first. This  is  a  very  simple  robot with  only  one  joint. Imagine  here,  there's  a  motel to  rotate  this  joint, and  as  a  result,  the  positions of  the  end  point  will  change. En  point  will  change  x, y  will  change  as  the  functions  of  deter. For  this  simple  mechanism, I  can  actually  derive the  four  kinematics  equation directly  by  inspection  because x  is  L  cosine  theta. L  l  is  the  lin  length. L  project  along  the  x  axis, give  you  cosine  deter. Y  is  actually  L  sine  Teter. This  means  what  given  Titter, you  can  find  x  y, which  is  what  we  call  direct or  forward  kinematics  equation. Now, inverse  kinematics  is  the  other  way  round. Inverse  kinematics  means  given  x  y,  Pi  tit. Usually,  we  do  not  sf  it  using individual  equation  because  sine and  sine  are  not  one  to  one. For  example,  Given  the  same  x, there  are  two  possibility  actually. It  can  be  positive  anger  or  negative  anger. E.  I'm  trying  to say  that  you  should not  use  this  equation  to  solve. Because  if  x  is  positive, while  y  can  be  positive  or  negative, you'll  give  you  different  codinate. One  way  to  overcome  this problem  is  that  you  just divide  y  divided  by  x, divided  by  x,  then  basically,  you  get  L, L,  L  l  and l  cancel  each  other,  you  get  tangent. And  tangent  t  basically give  you  t  equal  to  t  tangent  y  over  x. If  you  use  tangent, then  the  quadrant  will be  taken  into  consideration. That  means  which  quadrant  is  in  depends  on, whether  x  is  positive  or  y  is  negative. Because  x  and  y, both  positive,  it  will  be  here. If  x  is  positive, y  is  negative,  then  it'll  be  here. Similarly,  over  here,  you  know  that x  is  negative  where  y  is  positive. In  this  case,  both  x  and  y  will  be  negative. By  using  tangent,  in  particular, there's  a  function  called  tangent  two. Given  x  and  y, and  depending  on  the  sine  of  x  and  y, we  can  get  this  angle  in  any  quadn, which  means  that  if  you  see two  equations  with  sine  sine, usually  you  should  combine  them  by  division. That  you  will  tell  you the  correct  quad  in  which  is  in. Now,  before  we  can solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem, we  need  to  compact  the  representations of  the  orientation. Because  we  are  operating  in a  three  dimensional  space,  X  Y  Z. For  position  is  very  natural. For  position  is  a  translation, just  X  Y  Z,  is  three  dimensional. However,  orientation  is  not  really a  compact  representation  because two  thirds  of  the  information  is  redundant. Y  two  third  of  the  information  is  redundant. If  you  look  at  the  orientation  matrix, it  consists  of  r  one,  r2r3. Position  is  okay  because position  is  three  dimensional. Is  just  a  translations  of your  origin  of  the  mobile  frame  respect to  the  origin  of  the  big  spring. This  is  three  dimensional. However,  for  orientation, This  is  represented  by  three  vectors, r  one,  r  two,  r  three. Each  of  these  three  vector is  three  dimensional. This  is  the  examples that  we  have  seen  before  the  break, page  35,  where  you  have  r  one, r  two,  and  r  three. Each  of  them  is  three  dimensional. This  basically  means  that  if  you  put them  into  a  vector, say  C  a  zero  for  this  one, then  a  negative  c  zero  for  the  second  one, and  then  you  put  zero, zero,  negative  one  for  the  third  one. This  vector  is  nine  dimensional. When  you  stack  them  out  into  a  vector, it  will  be  nine  dimensional. But  however,  orientation  should  be three  dimensional.  Three  dimensional. Position  is  three  dimensional. Orientations,  is  rotation  about  x  y  z. A  minimum  representations  of the  orientations  will  be  three  dimensional. Now,  now  you  have  a  di  dimensional  vector. I  mean  two  thirds  of the  information  is  redundant. It's  not  a  minimum  representations of  the  orientation. Usually,  before  we  solve the  inverse  kinematic  problem, we  will  try  to  compact  the  orientation from  R  nine  to  r  three. This  is  R  nine. We're  going  to  compact  it  into a  three  dimensional  representations of  the  orientation. It's  called  minimum  representation, and  then  we  can  put  it  into  the  vector  form. Back  to  this  one,  if you  read  this  again,  you  understand, RO  is  not  a  compact  representations of  the  orientations  because orientation  is  three  dimensional  minimum. Here  we  have  nine,  therefore, two  thirds  of  the  information  is  redundant. There  are  various  ways  to compact  the  orientation. Here,  we  will  use two  configuration  vector  form because  this  is  the  easiest  form. There  are  many  other  forms which  you  can  try  to  read  it  on  your  own, such  as  oiler  angles, less  angle  or  artanan. These  are  other  representations  of the  orientation  so  that  you  can  put  it into  a  minimum  representation. The  dimensional.  As  I  said, we  only  focus  on  two  configuration  vector, which  is  easier  to  understand. The  purpose  is  to  understand the  concept  that  for  orientation, They  are  redundant  information, which  you  need  to  put  it into  a  more  compact  form. Okay. Let  us  look  at  the  orientations  again, which  consists  of  three  vectors. Approach  vectors,  sliding  vectors and  normal  vectors. Now,  approach  vector  is  important because  it  tells  you the  directions  of  the  two. But  however,  it  has  one  problem. You  cannot  use  the  approach  vector alone  because  it  does  not  tell you  the  rotation  of  the  sliding  vectors. It  does  not  tell  you  how the  sliding  vector  is  Rotated. In  fact,  if  you  look  at  all  the  robots. Maybe  I  use  this  robot  to  illustrate. You  can  see  that  no  matter  how  I rotate  the  joint,  right? My  approach  if  I  rotate  the  joint, right,  my  approach  vectors is  in  some  cases  is  changing. In  some  cases  do  not  because, for  example,  the  last  joint. If  I  rotate  the  last  joint, it  does  not  change,  but  it does  give  me  the  gripper  direction. So  I  say  again,  if  I  change  my  joint  one, my  approach  factor  change. The  approach  direction  change. If  I  change  your  joint two,  this  is  joint  one. If  I  change  my  joint  two, my  approach  factor  also  change. If  I  change  my  joint  three, the  approach  direction  is  also  changing. He  similarly  joint  four  joint  five, will  change  your  approach  direction. But  the  only  one  which  will not  change  your  approach  direction will  be  the  last  joint. Last  joint,  the  row  angle. Now  it  is  pointing  towards  you. No  matter  how  I  rotate  this  joint, it  will  still  be  pointing  towards  you. If  you  go  back  to  this  one, he  basically  tells  you  that the  approach  directions, do  not  give  you  the  row  directions, which  is  the  sliding directions  of  your  gripper. Because  no  matter  how you  rotate  your  row  angles, The  last  joint.  You  will not  rotate  your  gripper  directions. Which  means  that  if  you  just  use  this  alone, is  not  enough  to  represent  the  orientation, even  though  this  is  three  dimensional. Right? We  need  to  have  both. We  need  to  have  approach. We  also  need  to  have  the  angle. One  way  is  that  this R  three  and  Q  n  into  a  vector. But  it  is  still  not  a  minimum  representation because  it's  four  dimensional. Because  R  three  is  three  dimensional, Q  n  is  one  joint  angle. Altogether  is  four  dimensional. Which  means  that  we  can't  use  this. The  idea  of  a  two  configuration  vector is  actually  very  simple. Suppose  that  you  take the  approach  vector,  which  is  this  one. And  remember,  this  is  your  row  angle. As  I  illustrated  to  you  just  now, no  matter  how  you  rotate  your  row  angle, such  as  this  way,  It does  not  change  your  approach  direction. It's  still  pointing  at  the  same  direction. We  need  to  have  both  R  three  and R  and  n  has  to be  used  to  define  your  orientation. But  however,  if  we  simply  append Q  n  to  R  three,  is  still  dimensional. The  idea  of  two configuration  vectors  is  stated  here. He  note  that  r  three, which  is  a  unit  vector, specify  a  certain  directions. Suppose  that  you multiply  this  approach  vectors, for  example,  this  is the  scarro  robot,  which  is  fixed. If  you  multiply  this  approach  vector by  a  scalar,  A. R  three  is  a  unit  vector. If  you  multiply  by  A, the  magnitude  will  become  A,  would  become  A. If  A  is  positive, then  you  will  not  change  the  direction. A  must  be  positive. I  say  again,  if  you  take this  approach  vector  and multiply  by  a  scalar, your  vector  will  change  magnitude. Depending  on  A  is  greater than  one  or  less  than  one. If  it's  greater  than  one, it  increase  the  magnitude. If  A  is  less  than  one, the  magnitude  is  smaller. The  whole  idea  is  that  A  must  be  positive  in such  a  way  that  Excuse  me. A  must  be  positive  in  such  a  way  that the  directions  of  the  approach vector  will  not  change. If  A  is  negative,  then  you  have  a  problem because  you'll  change the  directions  of  your  approach  vector. For  a  three. Now,  how  do  we  link  it  to  our  row  angles? We  try  to  get an  A  as  a  functions  of  a  row  angle, so  that  is  positive. Exponential  term  is  one  example  because  if you  have  an  exponential  term to  the  power  of  something, take  note  that  is  always  positive. X,  whether  x  is  positive  or  x  is  negative, or  x  is  equal  to  zero, you  will  always  be  a  positive  quantity. This  basically  means  that  I  can  put this  exponential  term  as a  function  of  quarter. Right  where  Q  four can  be  positive  or  negative. Your  Q  four  can  rotate one  direction  as  positive. It  can  rotate the  other  direction  as  negative. And  I  want  a  positive  quantity  functions of  Q  four  so that  I  can  include my  Q  four  into  the  magnitude of  the  approach  vector,  right? A  is  e  to  Q  four  divided  by  Pi. Pi  is  just  some  scale  link. Some  scale  links  to  convert  it into  the  appropriate  quantities. Even  without  that,  is  also  fine. Suppose  that  you  put  it  directly  in  radient, then  you  can  just  put  exponential  terms to  the  power  of  Q  four,  which  is  indi. Okay  next,  multiply  this  term as  a  functions  of  f  by  R  three. You  get  something  like  this.  R  three is  multiplied  by  a  positive  quantity. This  positive  quantity  is  a  functions of  Q  n.  Q  n  can  be  positive  or  negative, but  exponential  terms  of  Q n  is  always  positive.  This  is  a  key  idea. It  means  that  I  can  get  my  Q. I  can  met  my  R  three from  the  directions  of  the  vector. I  can  get  my  Qn. From  the  magnitude  of  the  vector. This  give  me  the  approach  vector  as  well  as the  row  angle  in a  compact  form  because this  will  be  three  dimensional. Still  R  three. If  you  have  three  dimensional  vector, you  multiply  by  a  scalar, the  magnitude  is  still  three  dimensional. This  is  one  way  to  represent your  orientation  in  a  compact  manner. So  to  summarize,  we  need  the  approach  vector. We  also  need  the  sliding  vector. But  if  you  put  a  vector and  sliding  vector  together, even  if  you  take  out this  R  one  is  still  six  dimensional, which  is  not  a  minimum  representation. We  observed  that  we  don't  really need  r  two  because by  rotating  this  Qn is  equivalent  to  rotating  r  two. One  way  is  that  you  put  r  one  and  Qn. However,  it  is  still  four  dimensional. Still  not  the  minimum  representation. The  whole  idea  is  that,  can  you multiply  R  one  by  Q  n? If  you  do  so,  because  Q n  can  be  positive  or  negative. If  it's  positive,  is  pointing this  direction,  is  negative, your  approach  vector  change  direction, which  is  not  what  we  want  because my  approach  vector  should always  be  in  this  direction. Therefore,  the  idea  is  that  I will  multiply  R  three, and  not  one  r  three, the  approach  vectors  by  a  positive  quantity, which  is  this  exponential  functions of  Q  n.  That even  if  Q  n  is  positive  or  negative, This  will  always  remain  as  positive. At  the  same  time,  I  can get  a  three  dimensional  vector, which  is  a  minimum  representations  of the  orientation.  This  is  the  idea. The  other  thing  to  take  note  is  that exponential  term  looks  like  this. If  this  is  your  Q  n, this  is  Q  n  divided  by  Pi  exponential  terms, when  it's  positive,  it's  increasing. W's  negative  is  decreasing  towards  zero, you  will  not  reach  zero. It  can  be  small,  but you  actually  not  reach  zero. It  can  be  a  very  small  quantity, but  you  will  not  reach  zero, and  Q  n  actually  is  limited. By  plus  -180  degree,  for  example,  correct? Therefore,  we  can  obtain this  mapping,  which  is  one  to  one. One  to  one  is  important  because when  you  solve  the  inverse  kinematic  problem, you  must  be  able  to  get  a  unique  value. Even  each  A,  we  will  be  able  to get  a  unique  row  angles in  solving  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. This  basically  means  that  from the  transformation  metrics, we  have  a  p,  we  have  a  r, and  these  are  the  redundant  information. Firstly,  we  take  out  the  p directly  because  it's  r  three. As  for  the  rotation,  we  have  r  one, r  two,  and  r  three. We'll  take  out  r  three  only, and  that  represent  the  approach  diction. In  order  to  represent  the  sliding  direction, we  take  out  Q  n. Because  by  rotating  Qn, you  can  rotate  the  sliding  direction  as  well. In  order  to  compare  it  into a  minimum  representations, we  put  E  to  the  part  of  Q  n  divided  by  Pi, multiply  with  r  three. This  basically  means  that  I  encode this  Qn  into  the  magnitude of  the  orientation  vector. The  directions  of  the  orientation  vectors can  be  obtained  by  the  artery  itself. Are  give  you  the  directions of  the  approach  vectors, and  Q  and  give  you  the  sliding, directions  of  your  gripper. This  is  the  basic  ideas  so  that  we  can then  give  a  minimum  representation because  this  is  six  dimensional. The  three  dimensional, these  three  dimensional, this  is  a  scalar. And  this  is  a  compact  representations of  the  position  and  orientation. By  using  this  method, we  call  two  configuration  vector. As  I  said,  there  are  other  methods. If  you're  interested,  you  can just  try  to  read  more. I've  uploaded  this  slide, so  you  need  not  copy  it  down. This  just  a  summary of  what  we've  discussed  so  far. After  you  have  obtained the  full  kinematics  model, you  partition  it  into  this  form, P  repres  translation,  the  position. R  represenda  orientation. This  is  what  it  means, P  is  the  translation, is  this  three  dimensional. This  is  straightforward. No  need  to  do  anything. However,  for  the  orientation, It  consists  of  three  vectors,  r  one,  r  two, r  three,  which  is  the  approach, sliding  and  normal  directions. If  you  put  them  into  a  vectors, you'll  be  nine  dimensional. To  third  of the  information  is  redundant  because the  minimum  representation is  six  dimensional. T  for  position,  three,  four, orientation,  rotation  about  x,  y,  and  z. Therefore,  we  need  to  compare  it into  six  dimensional,  right? Three  for  positions,  and three  for  orientation. In  order  to  do  so, what  we  do  is  that  we  just  take  out  r  three, take  r  three  only  and  put  it  into  here. R  three,  take  note  is  three  dimensional. R  three  is  three  dimensional. But  if  you  just  put  p  and  r  three, it  is  not  enough,  because it  does  not  give  you the  sliding  information,  correct? You  must  align  your  gripper with  the  flat  surface  of  the  object. We  notice  that  Q n  will  be  able  to rotate  your  sliding  vectors, with  respect  to  your  approach  vectors. When  you  rotate  it,  it  can  give  you the  gripper  direction  as  well. We  can  take  out  Q  n  as  well  with  r  three. But  this  is  still  R  four. Still  four.  Basically,  we  just  merge  the two  into  this  form. By  using  exponential  term of  Q  n  divided  by  Pi, so  that  is  always  positive. In  the  sense  that  is  another  vector, where  the  directions  is  still  the  same, still  the  approach  directions, but  the  magnitude  of it  can  give  you  the  row  angle. As  a  result,  then  you  can have  three  dimensional  for  position. Three  dimensional  for  orientations. In  total,  I  give  you a  minimum  representations  of your  position  and  orientation. This  is  the  key  idea. Let  us  look  at  one  example where  we  have  derived the  forward  kinematics  models for  disc  robots,  Discard  robots. In  this  case,  you  can  see  that  we want  to  find  out the  inverse  kinematics  equation. What  will  be  joiner  one,  Joiner  two, and  then  joiner  three, and  how  do  rotate  Joiner four  so  that  you  will  pick  up  a  certain  part. That  means  given  the  location  of  the  parts, and  given  the  orientation as  well  as  the  sliding  directions, how  do  we  find  out the  joint  angles  to  achieve  this  task? This  is  inverse  kinematics  problem. In  order  to  solve the  inverse  kinematics  problem, you  must  first  derive the  forward  kinematics  models, and  then  put  it into  a  minimum  representation. Minimum  representation P  is  three  dimensional. Let's  call  it  the  b123. This  is  also  put into  a  compact  form,  three  dimensional. Let's  call  it  the  B  four,  five, six,  we  have  a  six  dimensional  vector. Let's  call  it  the  B. This  is  called  a  two  configuration  vector. Let's  go  back  to  page  35  before  the  break, where  we  have  derived the  forward  kinematics  model for  this  scarro  robot, and  we  will  have  to  put this  transformation  matrix  into  this p.  Where  we  have a  minimum  representation,  six  dimensional. So  first  step  is  to  take  out  the  position. Let's  call  it  P  one,  P  two, P  three,  or  you  can  call  x  y  z. It  doesn't  matter.  Just  put it  into  the  vector  directly. V  one,  two,  three. Next,  take  out  the  r  three. What  is  r  three, your  approach  vector,  and  then  put  it  here. But  it  does  not  give you  the  sliding  directions, which  is  the  directions  of  the  gripper. And  the  gripper  direction is  determined  by  Q  four. This  is  robot  where  it  is  always  pointing downward  and  you  rotate  Q four  to  rotate  the  grip. We  take  Q  four,  and encode  it  with  exponential  term. That  is  always  positive and  multiply  by  the  approach  vectors. You  can  get  three  dimensional  vectors, where  the  magnitude  is representing  the  Q  four, the  directions  is representing  the  approach  direction. Altogether,  we  have  six  dimensional  vector. I'm  trying  to  explain  how do  we  derive  this  one. Notice  that  here  there's  a  transpose, which  means  that  transpose  of  this,  correct? Transpose  of  this  will basically  be  factors.  A  column  vectors. There  is  a  row  vector,  you  transpose  it, you  become  a  column  vectorse. That  is  actually  called the  two  configuration  vectors. W  is  negative  of  I, I,  I  means  001. Negative  I  three  means zero,  zero,  negative  one. This  is  just  a  short  note for  this  approach  direction. This  robot  has  only  four  degree  of  freedom. Therefore,  we  can  see  that you  cannot  achieve  some  orientation. He  orientation  has  three  dimensions, but  in  this  case,  here  two  of  them  is  fixed. I  can  only  rotate  the  gripper,  that's  all. I  can't  change  the  Approach  direction. Now,  with  this,  we  are  now  ready  to formally  introduce inverse  kinematics  problem. Given  a  two  configuration  factors, which  is  six  dimensional. The  purpose  of  solving the  inverse  kinematics  problem  is  to  find  out what  are  the  joint  angles,  given  a  task, given  the  positions  of  the  object, given  the  orientations  which you  want  to  pick  up  the  object, what  should  be  the  joint  angle to  accomplish  this  task. There  are  two  ways  to  solve  this  problem. It  means  that  suppose  that  you  have the  four  kinematics  model, a  functions  of  the  joint  angles, and  you  put  it  into the  two  configuration  form. Then  given  a  task, let's  call  it  the  B  at. Given  a  desired  position  and orientations,  representing  the  task, What  should  be  the  joint  angle? What  should  be  the  joint  angle to  accomplish  this  task. This  involves  solving the  inverse  kinematic  problem. One  way  is  to  use  numerical  method. I  think  some  of  you  may  take 62  or  four,  numerical  methods, which  means  that  you  leave  it  to the  algorithms  to  find  out  what  is  the  que, which  matches  the  bill? He  In  order  to  put it  into  a  numerical  problems, you  need  to  write this  equation  into  this  form. Fine  Q,  we  specify  this  equation. Sometimes  using  numerical  methods, you  cannot  get  exactly  zero. What  you  need  to  do  is  that you  take  num  on  this, which  is  always  positive. Then  you  try  to  minimize  it. Minimize  means  what  you  try  to. Fine  the  solution,  which  is  close  to  zero. You  may  not  be  able  to  find  exactly  zero, but  at  least  it  should  be as  small  as  possible  close  to  zero. This  is  called  minimization. Problem.  You  have  objective  functions. You  try  to  minimize  it. This  method  though  is  easy  to  implement. But  however,  it  has  a  problem. Every  time  when  you  have a  new  location  of  the  object, you  need  to  solve  the  numerical  algorithm. Which  may  take  many  iterations  to  converge. For  example,  It  may take  1,000  iterations  to solve  the  numerical  problems, to  find  the  solution. Each  time  you  have  a  new  task, you  need  to  go  through  this  numerical algorithms  over  and  over  again, which  means  that  it  is  time  consuming. In  production  line,  time  is  critical. You  want  it  to  be  executed as  fast  as  possible. Numerical  method  is  not  very good  you  cannot  find the  closed  form  solution. Analytic  method  is  usually  used. Which  means  that  you've  tried  to  find a  closed  form  solution,  expresic  equation. And  then  use  it  to calculate  your  joint  angle  directly. The  whole  idea  is  like  that. Given  this  task, I  want  to  find  a  closed  form  solution. Close  form  solution,  analytic  equation, so  that  I  can  calculate  Q given  any  position  and  orientation. Without  having  to  go  through iterative  algorithms  thousand  times, a  few  thousand  times each  time  you  have  a  new  task. Which  means  that  we  will use  analytic  methods,  usually. But  just  for  your  information that  numerical  method  is  possible, if  you  cannot  find a  closed  form  solution,  right? Now,  here,  let  us  look  at some  basic  definitions  or conditions  for  the  assistance  of  solution, meaning  that  you  must  be  able to  solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem. Actually,  this  is  quite  common  sense. Your  desired  position  must be  within  your  work  envelope. You  should  not  specify  a  position outside  the  reach  of  the  robot. Then  you  cannot  find  a  solution. It  does  happen  in  simulation. Some  students  may  put  a  position  which  is beyond  the  reach  of  the  robot and  you  cannot  find  a  solution. Orientation  is  also  the  same. If  your  robot  has limited  degree  of  freedom such  as  a  scara  robot, is  always  pointing  downward, then  if  you  try  to  make  the robot  get  a  position, which  is  not  vertically  downward, that  means  you  specify  orientation, which  is  not  vertically  downward, then  obviously  you  cannot  find  the  solution. All  this  actually  means, it  must  be  realized  above, P  must  be  within  the  workspace, Oientation  must  be  within the  limited  degree  of  freedoms  of  the  robot. That  means  that  if  the  robot has  only  five  joints, it  cannot  realize  some  orientation. But  if  you  have  robot  with  six  joints, Then  you  need  not  worry. The  only  thing  you  have  to  ensure  is that  the  position  must be  within  the  workspace. Orientation,  if  you  have  six  joints, you  can  realize  any  orientation. Now,  sometimes  you  may  have more  than  three  joints  for  your  minor  axis. And  as  a  result, you  have  more  than  six  joints, three,  four  position. Maybe  44  orientation. Maybe  you  have  extra  degree  of  freedom, that  kind  of  robot is  called  redundant  robots. Redundant  means  that  you  have  more  than required,  more  than  required. But  the  redundancy,  the  additional  degree  of freedom  can  be  used in  obstacle  avoidance  sometime. For  example,  in  order  to  reach  for this  position  with a  certain  orientation,  at  the  same  time, avoiding  something,  You  may  need additional  degree  of  freedom in  order  to  achieve  that. In  this  case,  it  is  called  redundant  robots. Now,  next, in  solving  your  inverse  kinematics  problem, take  note  that  it  may  not give  you  a  unique  solution. Sometimes.  This  is  an  illustration where  the  position  of  the  robot  is  here. And  this  is  the  orientation specified  by  the  approach, as  well  as  the  row  angle. A  fixed  row  angle  will  give  you a  particular  directions  of  a  gripper. In  this  case,  you  can see  that  there  are  actually  two  possibility. Sometimes  the  joint  can  be  disconfiguration. Sometimes  the  joint  can  be  disconfiguration. This  is  to  say  that  if your  hand  can  bend  the  other  way  around, We  usually  bend  this  way. If  you  can  bend  the  other  way  round, you  can  see  that  to  reach  for  the  same  point, there  are  two  configuration. For  human  being  is  quite  unique, for  robot  because  it's  a  motel, it  can  rotate  360  degree. Sometimes  you  may  end  up with  multiple  solutions. In  this  case,  you  just  choose  one  of them.  Just  choose  one  of  them. The  solution  may  not  be  unique. Now,  let  us  return  to  the  example  2.12. Where  we  have  obtained the  forward  kinematics  model. Remember,  early  on, after  multiplying all  the  transformation  matrixes  together, we  get  a  single  transformation  matrix for  position  is  straightforward, R  three,  orientation,  nine  dimensional. To  third  of  the  information  is  redundant. The  whole  idea  of compact  representation  is  to  convert the  orientation  from  nine dimensional  into  three  dimensional. One  way  is  that  you  first  take  out the  position  and  take out  the  approach  vector, which  is  three  dimensional. This  is  approach. This  is  position  vector. But  if  you  just  take  the  approach  vectors, something  is  missing,  which  is the  directions  of  the  gripper. Directions  of  the  gripper. Direction  of  gripper  can  be  specified  by the  row  angle.  The  last  angle. In  this  case,  this  R  five,  sorry  Q  five. This  robot  has  only  55  joints. You  cannot  realize  arbitrary  orientation unless  you  have  six  joint. You  take  out  the  row  angle, put  into  a  positive functions  of  the  row  angle, which  is  the  exponential  function. Multiply  by  R  three  by  this  exponential  term. Then  you  can  put  it into  a  compact  representation. This  is  your  r  three. This  is  your  exponential  term. Multiply  your  r  three by  this  exponential  term, then  you  can  encode  the  row angles  into  your  orientation  vectors, which  is  still  three  dimensional. This  is  called  two  configuration  vector. It's  just  one  way  to  represent your  orientation  in  the  minimum  form. Now,  after  we  have  obtained  this, we  can  now  solve the  inverse  kinematics  problem. The  first  three,  we  call  the  one,  two, three,  and  four,  five,  six. Altogether,  six  dimensional. Now,  what  is  four  kinematics? Four  kinematics  means  that  given  d  five, Find  the  position,  find  the  orientation. This  is  called  forward  kinematics. But  however,  robot  task  is  a  reverse. Robot  ts  is  that given  the  position  of  the  object, given  the  orientation  in which  you  want  to  pick  up  the  object, you  want  to  tell  the  robot What  are  the  joint  angles? You  want  to  find the  joint  angles  to  achieve  this  task, which  means  given  a  certain position  and  orientation. What  are  the  joint  angles  of  the  robot? You  must  tell  the  robot exactly  what  to  do because  it's  a  low  level  machine. You  must  tell  it  exactly, what  is  the  joint  angle  one  joint  angle two  joinle  three  joinle  four  jingle  five? This  robot  has  only  five  joints so  that  it  can  move  to that  desired  position  and accomplish  the  desired  orientation. This  is  a  reverse.  That  means  that  first, you  derive  the  follow  kinematics  model. Put  it  into  a  compact  minimum  representation, then  solve  the  inverse  kinematics  problem  so that  given  any  position, any  orientation,  I'll  be able  to  find  the  positions. I'll  be  able  to  find  the  joint  configuration. This  is  so  called the  inverse  kinematics  problem. Now,  here,  there's  a  problem because  every  robot has  different  kinematics  equation. This  is  a  particular  kinematic  equation. If  you  move  to  another  robot, you  have  another  different  equation. Similarly,  you  have  six  degree  of  freedom. Then  you  also  have different  joint  angles  from  to  six. Which  means  that  the  inverse kinematics  solution  is  not  unique. It  depends  on  the  kinematic  structures. Therefore,  there's  no  systematic  way. Unless  you  use  numerical  method, you  just  put  this  into the  numerical  solutions  and  try  to  find  five, which  fit  this  equation. But  as  I  said,  that  is  not effective  because  it's  time  consuming. In  production  line,  we  want  everything  to ex  in  a  very  fast  pace. This  basically  means  that  I  need  to  find  out an  analytic  equation  that  given  any  position, maybe  here,  maybe  here  maybe  here, and  maybe  sometimes,  different  orientation. I  should  be  able  to  use  this  equation to  immediately  calculate,  ir, far  far  without  going  through any  iterations  as  in  the  numerical  methods. This  is  called  analytic  method, closed  form  solution. However,  solving  this  equations, will  required mathematical  backgrounds  in  what  intrigomtri? Because  all  these  are  signed sign.  Sine  and  cosine. You  need  to  review  your trigar  matters  and  then observe  all  the  equations carefully  in  order  to  solve  them. Usually,  we  will  use  two  methods. Usually.  If  you  divide sine  by  cosine,  you  get  tangent. He  next,  if  you square  sine  and  square  cosine, and  add  is  equal  to  one. These  two  are  the  most common  three  grommetric  methods that  we'll  use  in  solving the  inverse  kinematics  problem. Let's  look  at  some  of  the  details. Now,  firstly,  if  I observe  the  first  two  equation, let's  focus  on  the  first  two  equations. Right?  These  are  the  first  two  equations. One  is  x,  W  two  is  one. If  you  look  at the  first  two  equation  carefully, everything  in  the  bracket  are  the  same. Outside  the  bracket,  that  means  C  one, S  one,  Cs  one, cosine  two  are  different. Look  at  this  equation  again, and  see  that  everything  in  the  bracket, which  are  underlined  by d  dot  line,  they  are  the  same. This  basically  means  but  if you  try  to  divide  the  two  equations, Then  you  can  cancel the  common  terms,  correct? If  you  can  cancel  the  common  terms, then  you  only  left  with  sine  and  sine, which  is  what,  which  is  tangent  one. By  dividing  the  first  two  equations, I  can  cancel  a  lot  of common  terms  and  I  can get  a  very  simple  equation. Which  is  two  divided  by W  one  is  tangent.  This  means  what? Q  one  is  tangent  of  W  2/1. This  is  my  first  inverse  kinematics  equation, given  w1n2, given  the  desired  positions  of  x, desired  positions  of  of  the  object, given  the  location  of  the  object. I  can  use  this  to  calculate my  first  joint,  Q  one. So  I'm  just  trying  to  explain this  first  equation. By  the  way,  I'll  upload  all  this in  the  NTU  len. So  you  don't  need  to  copy,  right? You  can  just  download  it. Okay.  And  this  is  by first  inverse kinematics  equation  first  equation. He  says  that,  given the  B  one  in  the  two,  fine. Next,  in  solving your  inverse  kinematics  equation, one  thing  to  take  note  is  that  eventually you  will  implement  them  in  a  program. As  a  robotics  engineers, you  model  the  forward  kinematics, then  you  solve  the  inverse kinematics  equation. And  you  put  it  into the  program  for  the  user  to  use. Users  are  just  operator, factory  operators,  right? They  can  learn  programming  and  just  use  it. They  will  not  know  what  is inside  the  robot  systems, the  engineers  design  it  so  that the  production  operator  can  use  it. So  as  far  as  the production  operator  is  concerned, they  will  just  key  in  W  one  and  W  two, X  Y  position,  right, as  well  as  other  parameters. Then  the  program  will run  to  the  first  step,  find  one. Right?  So  for  the  for  the  robot  engineers, we'll  program  this  equation  into  the  program. And  as  you  run  the  program,  right? When  you  reach  this  deep, you  calculate  Q  one. From  there  onwards,  q  one  is  known. When  you  run  the  program, when  you  run  to  this  step, after  you  execute  this  command, one  is  already  a  known,  right? Parameters,  known  angles. When  you  solve the  inverse  kinematics  problem, you  should  trace  which  one  is  known, which  is  not  known, and  at  what  stage? If  one  is  known,  next, if  you  look  at  all  the  equation again,  by  the  way, this  is  just  a  What  I  mentioned  just  now, because  your  angles  may have  different  values  when x  y  is  in  different  quad, X  Y  is  in  different  quadan. In  this  case,  usually there's  this  function  called  n  two. An  two  can  take  care  of  which  quad  is, not  to  worry  too  much  is  just  g. Next. After  a  Q  one  is  known, if  you  go  back  to the  four  kinematics  equation  again, and  identify. This  means  this  is  known. This  is  known.  This  and  these  are  also  known. We  already  know  some  of  the  parameters inside  this  pinmatic  equation. I  will  focus  on  the  last  three. Last  three,  to  try  to isolate  this  mb  parameters,  34. Because  this  is  prosecutor  proc. This  is  cosine  prosecutor  four. Because  of  the  fact  that  Q one  is  already  known, I  can  do  this. I  will  multiply  the  first  equation by  cosine  Q  one. Correct?  If  you  multiply the  first  equation  by  cosine, right  side,  you  get  cosine  multiplied by  four,  right  inside. This  is  the  original  equation. You  multiply  by  cosine  one. You'll  get  cosine  Q one  square  in  the  first  one. Second  one,  if  you  multiply  by  sine  Q  one, both  sides  sine  Q  one,  then  basically, you  get  cosine  squared  n  sine  squared. Why  do  you  do  that?  Remember,  I say  that  you  use  this  quite  often. Cosine  square  by  sine  square  is  equal  to  one. The  purpose  is  that  if  I multiply  by  this,  here  I  get  square. If  you  get  square,  then  you  can  add  them. Add. B  sine  squared  plus cosine  squared  is  equal  to  one. When  you  add  them  up, Sine  square  plus  cosine  square is  equal  to  one, add  up,  this  is  a  common  term. You  get  a  common  term,  and this  is  also  a  common  term. I  say  again,  I  multiply  the  four  by  C  one. I  multiply  the  five  by  S  one. The  other  side  of  equation, I  get  cosine  one  square  and  sine  one  square. And  the  others  are  all  the  common  terms. In  a  sense  that  you  get  sine square  plus  sine  square, and  this  is  equal  to one,  and  you  will  disappear, and  you  become  an  equation  with only  sine  Q  plus  Q  three  plus  four, as  well  as  the  exponential  term e  to  the  part  of  f  five  divided  by  Pi. Next,  I  invert  the  sine  of  this, that  means  I  multiply  both  sides  by  negative, so  that  it  become  positive. I  just  invert  the  sine, that  it  become  positive on  the  right  hand  side. He  then  notice  that  here, I  have  a  similar  term, except  that  sine  is  consigned. Except  that  sine  is  cosigned. Which  means  that  if  I  divide  this  equations, by  the  last  equation, which  is  W  six  and  I  invert  the  sign. Then  I  can  get  this  term  cancel. I  will  get  sine  divided  by  cosine, which  is  tangent,  p  three  plus  four. Now,  one  is  known,  right? Because  you  have  calculated  it  by the  first  inverse  kinematics  equation. Imagine  you  run  the  program,  is  calculated. This  basically  means  that  you know  what  is  cosine. You  can  calculate  sine and  the  456  user  input. Where  is  the  desired  position  orientations? Which  means  everything  on the  left  hand  side  is  known. This  basically  means  that  you  can  invert this  equation  because everything  here  is  known. You  then  can  calculate  234  as art  tangent  of  this  term. Tangent  of  this  term  will  give you  three  and  four. Basically,  I'm  trying  to explain  this  equation  over  here. Q  two,  proc  PC  four  is the  tangent  PN  two  is  just  to differentiate  the  agion  of a  known  term  that  given  w4w  56  as  user  input, and  after  you  have  calculated  Q, you  can  use  this  to  calculate, p  three,  p  four. You  do  not  know  what  is  three  and  four, but  you  know  the  summations of  them,  summation  of  them. Sometimes  you  need  to  calculate  one  by  one. So  far,  what  we  have  done  is that  we  have  calculated, We've  calculated  Q  two,  prosec  plus  four. Then  you  go  back  to  all  your  equation  again. You'll  see  that  because prosecutor  PC  four  is  known, you  can  calculate  the  sine  and consign  of  them,  right? A,  D  are  the  kinematic  parameters,  right? We  know.  What  are  the  kinematic  parameters. Q  one  is  also  known. Therefore,  everything  which  I underline  in  R  dotted  line, they  are  all  known.  At  this  stage. That  means  you  run  the  program. You  can  calculate  Q  one, and  then  you  can  calculate  Q  two,  three, plus  four,  and  then  use  them  to  calculate everything  that  I  underline  there. Actually  you  include  all  this  as  well. But  let  us  focus  on  the first  three  equation  first. And  we  will  know  everything in  terms  of  one  and prosecutor  prosecute  four. Even  though  we  know  what  is prosecutor  prosecute four,  we  do  not  know  what  is, and  even  know  what  is  prosecute  three, We  just  know  the  summations  of  P  proc. Everything  which  I  underlined in  grad  are  unknown. For  solving  the  inverse  kinematics  problems, you  must  identify  all  those  known  terms. And  all  those  are  known  term, and  then  try  to  express  them. The  known  terms  in  terms  of  the  known  term. Next,  if  I  observe this  kinematics  structure  properly, again,  just  now,  you  know  that this  is  sine,  this  is  cosine. One  is  cosine,  one  is  sine. If  I  multiply  the  first  equation by  cosine  on  both  side,  multiply
