Okay.  Good  evening  class. Welcome  to  the  lectures  on  EE  6221, robotics  and  Intelligence  Sensors. Hey,  doctor  Cha  from the  School  of  Triple  E.  I will  be  your  lecturer for  the  first  part  of  this  course. So  if  you  have  any  questions, you  can  always  contact  me. This  is  my  e  mail  and  my  office  location. You  can  also  contact  me the  course  website,  NTU. All  the  cost  materials  are  uploaded  at the  cost  website  as this  is  still  the  air  drop  period. So  I  have  not  uploaded  everything  yet. And  after  the  air  drop  periods,  right, all  the  information  for Part  one  will  be  available. He  as  this  cost  name  implied there  are  two  parts  of the  course  robot  first, followed  by  intelligence  sensors. I'm  only  covering  the  first  part of  the  course  and  the  second  part on  intelligence  sensing  will  be covered  by  Professor  Gatan. For  my  part  of  the  course, basically  can  be  summarized by  this  rock  diagram  over  here. In  today's  lectures,  we  will  review some  basic  mathematics required  to  study  robotics, in  particular  kinematics, and  we'll  also  look  at  some  of the  applications  and  specifications for  robots. Next  week  on,  we  will  talk about  one  very  basic  concepts  in  robotics, which  is  called  kinematics, or  the  studies  of  robotics start  by  modeling  the  kinematics, which  is  basically  a  model, which  gives  you  the  relationship  between the  joint  variables  and the  position  and orientations  of  the  NE  factor. And  we'll  also  study briefly  about  trajectory  planning. Is  the  echo  very  strong? Let  me  try  another  one.  A. Okay.  Sorry  for  the  interruption. Let's  continue.  My  part  of the  course  will  be  basically summarized  by  this  pro  diagram. We  today  we'll  go  some  mathematics, required  for  the  study  of  kinematics. Next  week  we'll  study  about kinematics  modeling followed  by  trajectory  planning. And  the  other  part  of  the  course  is basically  on  robot  control. The  other  part  of  the  cost  will be  on  rope  control. W We  will  study how  to  cause  the  robot to  move  through  a  controller. Lastly,  the  last  part  of  my  course  will  be  on mobile  robots  and  we  will  only  focus on  the  mobile  robot  kinematics. And  the  notes  I believe  is  quite  sufficient  to  read the  notes  is  quite  sufficient. The  notes  is  quite  sufficient for  you  to  read  through  in  details, but  if  you  are  interested, you  can  also  refer  to  some  of the  textbooks  as  this is  a  post  graduate  course, so  you  cannot  find  a  single  textbook that  give  you  everything. For  the  first  textbook, it  will  be  mainly  for the  kinematics  parts  and  trajectory  planning. Second,  textbook  is  a  good  textbook for  robot  control, and  the  last  one  is  for  mobile  robotics. But  as  I  mentioned, the  notes  is  actually quite  sufficient  for  you to  read  through  in  details. In  case  you  are  new, This  course  like  other  courses, right  is  based  on  60%  examinations, closed  book,  and  40%  CAs. My  part  of  the  course  will  cover  CA  one, 15%.  So  this  is  P  one. Part  two  will  have  two  CA from  Professor  Hu  Gong. Details  will  be  announced later  and  there  will  be another  take  home  assignment as  well,  which  is  10%. And  my  part  of  the  CA  CA  one  will  be held  in  week  seven  during  the  lecture, which  means  here,  and more  details  will  be  announced  later. If  you  are  exchange  students  or  new, please  note  that  there  will  be no  lab  sessions  for  this  course. But  however,  I  will  announce some  optional  lab  sessions  for you  to  learn  about  robot  programmings, which  means  that  if  you're  interested, you  can  contact  the  lab to  learn  something  and have  some  hands  on  sessions about  robot  programmings. Okay.  As  for  the  others, you  know  that  you  need  to  get some  MSC  project  so as  to  get  some  hands on  experience,  right  on  robotics. If  you're  interested  in  a  robotics  project. Okay.  Before  I  start, just  to  let  t  This  course  is  rather  mat. Robotics  is  interesting  and is  now  getting  important, but  it  is  not  something that  is  easy  to  learn and  required  some  background  knowledge, such  as  metric  theorem, linear  control  theory. All  these  are  actually  covered under  your  undergraduate  study, and  this  is  a  postgraduate  course. Do  take  note  that  over  here, we  assume  that  you  will know  a  linear  control  theory  in particular  because  we  will  go  into more  advanced  robot  control  theory, which  is  basically  non  linear  control. And  do  review  them  necessary. Let's  start  the  lectures  today. Basically,  what  is  a  robot? Robot  is  actually  re  grammable, device  manipulators, which  is  able  to perform  I  think  I just  have  to  use  this  one. Sorry  about  that.  Robot  is a  reprogrammable multifunctional  manipulators, we  can  be  used  to  perform  a  variety  of  tasks. The  word  programmable  is important  because unlike  fixed  automated  machines, which  only  can  use to  perform  a  particular  task. Robot  can  be  used  to perform  multiple  tasks  just  like  human  hand, we  can  learn  to  perform  many  tasks. The  word  robot  actually  came  from  the  word. Robota  meaning  forced  labor. Initially,  human ambitions  that  we  want  to  make robot  machines  that  do something  that  we  do  not  wish  to  do. But  as  robot  evolve,  nowadays, robot  is  not  necessarily limited  to  just  forced  labor. There  are  a  variety  of  modern  applications. The  first  industrial  robots actually  was  not  long  ago, it  was  only  in  the  late  50s. And  based  on  the  current  technology, you  can  see  how  fast this  field  is  advancing  through  research. For  this  course,  because it's  a  beginner  course, we  will  start  with  manipulator, which  is  the  most  basic  parts  of a  robot  or  sometime  we  call  it  robotic  arm. This  figure  over  here  show  a  robotic  arms, which  is  basically  multiple  joints, we  drive  links. So  the  movements  of  the  joints basically  move  the  links, and  at  the  end  of  the  links, there  will  be  a  hand  or  factors. So  the  objective  is  to  control  the  joints, the  motels  so  that  you  can achieve  a  desired  position and  orientation  of  the  factor. Very  similar  to  human  arms, where  we  move  our  joints, and  as  a  result, you  will  be  able  to  manipulate  the  hand. The  basic  purpose  of  moving the  joint  is  actually  to  manipulate  the  hand. When  we  use  robot, it  actually  is  not  necessary that  we  must  always  use  robot. This  figure  here  show  a  comparison between  three  popular  methods,  menu  methods. Hard  automation  methods and  soft  automation  methods. Robot  falls  in  the  soft  automation  methods. Remember  that  robotics  is a  program  number  of  manipulators, able  to  perform  multiple  tasks, not  just  one  task. While  hard  automation  is  referring  to some  automated  machines  which  can only  be  used  to  perform  a  specific  task. For  example,  a  pick and  pas  machines  to  pick  up some  components  and  put it  on  the  printer  circuit  box. This  is  called  a  hard automation  machine  because  it  can  only use  to  perform  single  type such  as  picking  up  components, put  it  on  the  printer  circuit  board  PCB. And  this  figure  over  here  compared the  unit  cost  of making  a  product  versus  production  volume. And  we  have  three  methods. We  can  see  that  at a  very  low  production  volume  over  here, the  actual  manual  method  is  better. This  is  because  automated  method has  high  set  of  costs. You  need  to  spend  or invest  a  lot  of  money  on  the  machines. So  as  to  operate,  while  labor  methods, manual  methods  is  very  flexible,  right, you  hire  sufficient  enough of  operators  to  perform  the  task. Okay,  as  production  volume  increases, manual  methods  may  not  be  able  to  cope. So  you  need  machines  to speed  up  the  automations. And  after  some  production  volumes, we  can  see  that the  automation  methods  become  very attractive  because  it  can make  more  right  through  automations. And  as  the  production  volume  increases, we  notice  that  the  Hard  automation  methods, which  is  the  red  line  over  here, become  more  cost  effective. This  is  because  hard  automation  methods is  specialized  in  making  that  product. Therefore,  it  can  make  it at  a  very,  very  high  volume. Unlike  robots,  robot  is  flexible, but  it  may  not  be  as  fast  as the  hard  automated  machines. Whether  to  use  what  types  of automation  methods  or  even  manual  methods, very  much  depending  on  the  types  of products  as  well  as  the  production  volume. Because  for  soft  automated  methods such  as  robotics, the  advantage  is  that  after the  company  decided  not  to make  this  product  anymore, because  it  is  reprogrammable, you  can  actually  reconfigure reprogram  it  for  another  product. So  this  is  the  flexibility. Just  like  human,  we  can retrain  to  learn  new  skill. Robot  classifications,  right? This  is  just  for  your  information, that  means  that  if  you want  to  purchase  a  robot, what  kind  of  classifications and  specifications  do  we  look  at? Firstly,  we  can  be depending  on  drive  technologies, what  kind  of drive  technologies  that  you  want. The  workspace  envelopes,  how large  you  want  the  work  space  to  be, and  also  the  motion  control  methods. For  drive  technologies,  is basically  broadly  classified  into  two  types, electric  spike,  which  is  DC  motors. DC  motors  will  consist  of several  models  and  seper  motors. Steper  motels  as  the  name implied,  you  operate  in  steps, maybe  jump  from  five  degree  to  ten  degree, for  instance,  which  means that  you  cannot  perform  closed  loop  control. This  is  basically  for  open  loop  control. While,  in  some  cases, suppose  that  you  need  to manipulate  very  heavy  objects, very  heavy  loads,  you  will need  a  hydraulic  drive. So  depending  on  the  applications,  right, you  will  need  to  use different  types  of  technology. Hydraulic  drive  are  usually not  so  common  because it  is  not  that  clean  as  compared  to  DC  motel. But  however,  it  can  be used  to  manipulate  heavy  tasks, so  it  can  be  used  in,  for  example, constructions  automation. If  you  need  something  to  carry  heavy  loads, and  you  have  to  automate  it, so  you  need  a  hydraulic  drive. It  is  not  that  clean  because  you  need  fluid, you  need  fluid  to  drive  it. Now,  workspace  envelope  is another  way  that  you can  use  it  to  decide the  characteristics  of your  robot  to  be  purchased. For  this  workspace  envelope, is  basically  the  locus  of the  point  that  can  be  traced  by  the  wiz, which  means  that  if  you  reach  out your  arm  and  you  try  to  stretch it  out  and  move  all  your  joints. You  will  trace  out  a  workspace  envelope. This  is  basically  depending on  the  first  three  joints  only, which  we  call  the  major  axis. While  the  remaining  joints, why  do  we  say  remaining  joints  because  robots can  come  with  multiple  degree  of  freedoms. You  can  have  four  joints. Five  joint,  six  joint seven  joint  eight  joints. We  say  that  the  first  three  joints define  the  major  axis, and  the  remaining  joints  is  the  minor  axis, which  is  used  to  establish the  orientations  of  the  tools. Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  why  we only  look  at  the  first  three  join. I  here,  I  show  you  animations. Yeah. Now,  suppose  that  I  cut  up one  robot,  maybe  this  one. And  if  I  move  the  first  three  join, this  is  the  first  joint. You  can  see  that  the  end  factor  is  moving. That  means  the  end  of  the robot  manipulators,  is  always  moving. Well,  this  is  second  o, and  this  is  the  joint. If  you  reach  for  the  maximum  reach and  trace  out  this  end  point  of  the  with, basically,  you  can  know roughly  the  work  space. Here,  the  last  three  joint  as  you  will see  here  is  for  orientation. This  is,  this  is  fifth, and  this  is  the  last  joint. So  therefore,  the  first  three  joints is  mainly  to  define  the  positions, and  the  remaining  joints  is  basically  used to  define  the  orientations of  the  factors,  right? I  think  there's  some  interference  here. Okay. So  if  you  review  this  slides,  right, you  understand  that  we  can trace  the  work  space  envelopes by  using  the  first  three  joint. Okay.  Remaining  joint,  we  use to  define  the  orientations. And  there  are  two  types  of the  joints  in  a  robots. Okay.  Unlike  human  joints, human  joints  are  on  revue  joints. That  means  that  you  can only  rotate  your  joints, but  robot  is  a  machine. It  has  a  special  joint  type  prismatic  joint. The  left  hand  side  of this  animations  over  here is  a  revolute  joint. It's  easy  to  understand  you  have a  motor  attached  to  the  joint. When  the  motor  move  the  link attached  to  the  motor  will  move  the  joint. As  for  prismatic  joint is  causing  some  translations. Usually, you  use  some  mechanical conversions  to  convert rotational  rotations to  a  linear  translations. Therefore,  robot  has  two  types  of  joint, you  can  extend  the  link,  it can  rotate  the  joint. Here,  depending  on  what  types of  joint  you  use, P  plans  for  prismatic, RO  stand  for  revalue  joints, and  how  you  connect  them  together, you  will  have  a  different  types of  workspace  envelope. Here  for  the  first Workspace  envelopes, is  called  cartan  workspace, and  we  have  a  cartsan  coordinate  robots with  three  prismatic  joint. This  is  easy  to  understand. Suppose  that  you  put three  prismatic  joints  in  the  x, y  and  z  axis,  right? Per  pcular  to  each  other, you  basically  can  form  a  workspace, which  is  basically  a  ctian  workspace. So  this  is  the  first  types  of  a  joint, which  is  cartitian  coordinate  joint. Suppose  that  I  replace the  first  joint  by  a  revalue  joint. That  means  instead  of  a  prismatic  joint, suppose  that  you  can  rotate  this  base, and  in  this  case,  you  trace out  a  cyrrical  workspace. He  next,  Suppose  that I  replace  one  more  joint, the  second  joint  by  a  revolute  joint. This  resulted  in  spherical  workspace,  right? Which  means  that  second  joint instead  of  prismatic  joints, you  can  also  rotate. And  basically, your  workspace  will  look  like a  spherical  coordinates  workspace. As  I  said,  depending  on how  you  connect  the  joints  together, you  may  get  different  workspace. For  instance,  this  robot, we  call  carro  robot  is  also  based  on two  revenue  joints  and  one  prismatic  joint. But  however,  it  is connected  in  a  different  way. Therefore,  the  workspace is  also  slightly  different. In  this  configuration,  basically, you  rotate  the  first  joint in  the  second  join  revenue  joints, and  then  you  extend  this  factor  up  and  down. This  is  good  for  pick  and  place  operation. Lastly,  it  can  be  all. Revue  joints.  If  all  the  joints  are revue  joints  is  quite  similar to  human  hand,  right? Human  arm,  where  all  the  joints  are  revue. The  work  space  is  also  quite similar  to  our  workspace. It's  called  articulated  coordinate  workspace. There  are  also  different  types of  control  methods. Suppose  that  you  only  need a  robots  that  do  pick  and  place  tasks, that  means  you  pick  up  a  park  at  a  positions, what  we  call  point  and move  it  to  another  positions. In  this  case,  you  can use  a  simpler  controller. Simpler  controller  will  work. But  however,  for  some  more  demanding  tasks, where  you  need  to  follow  a  path, usually  you  need  a  more  advanced  controllers. This  means  that  we  need path  control  or  tracking  control. This  animation  show  point  to  point  control, you  pick  up  an  object,  move it  to  another  locations. But  for  some  more  demanding  tasks, such  as  spraying  something  over  a  workspace, you  need  to  plan  a  continuous  path, such  as  a  straight  line, maintain  a  certain  distance away  from  the  part, and  spray  the  pin  over  the  path. And  all  these  required  different  controllers, which  means  different  costs  sometime,  right? So  we  decide  what  to  buy by  our  specific  applications, and  also  that  depends  on  the  budget  as  well. Now,  next,  it  will also  depends  on  the  applications. So  robots  must  be used  in  some  very  clean  environment, while  some  can  be  used  in  normal  environment. So  depending  on  the  application, we  also  need  to  decide  what  types  of robots  to  a  purchase. Now,  traditionally,  robots  was used  in  a  factory  automation. Japanese  was  very  good  in automating  their  automobile  plants, and  this  typical  task will  involve  spot  welding, welding,  spray  painting, material,  handling,  et  cetera. But  as  robot  evolve,  nowadays, we  will  see  robots  not  limited to  manipulators  in  factory  automation. In  fact,  a  lot  of  the  applications in  robots  started  quite  long  ago. A  space  and  deep  sea  exploration started  very  long  ago. If  you  look  at the  international  space  stations, search  for  the  diagram, you'll  see  that  outside, there  is  a  very  huge  manipulator. There  is  a  robot  manipulator. The  Astronauts  over  there  can  use it  to  tally  operate  to  do  some  maintenance, so  that  they  don't  have  to  always  go out  of  the  space  stations  and  risk their  life  for  some simple  servicing  and  maintenance  tasks. Now,  this  S  explorations is  also  quite  commonly  used. Many  years  ago,  actually one  Malaysia  airline  took  off from  Malaysia's  Color  Lumpos on  the  way  to  Beijing  and  it  disappeared. You  can  do  a  search  on  that. Until  now  it's  not  found  yet. And  actually,  at  that  time, the  researchers  and  the  company deployed  a  lot  of underwater  robots  to  search  for it  and  recently  they tried  to  search  for  it  again, but  it  was  still  not  found  yet. So  this  technology  can  be  useful, for  some  the  range  which  we human  cannot  reach  or  very  hard  to  reach. Okay,  military  and  police  missions. After  9119/11,  a  lot  of the  militaries  and  police  started  to use  robots  for  bomb  disposal, for  example,  and  during the  or  Japan's  nuclear  crisis. Autonomous  robot  were  also sent  to  the  nuclear  plant  to see  whether  is  it  dangerous or  not  for  the  humans  to  go  in. Unfortunately,  basically, those  drones  that  you  see  in the  recent  wars  are results  of  robotic  technologies. Robot  technologies  originally  was intended  to  help  human  improve  our  life, and  in  the  end,  it  was  used in  some  other  purposes. Now,  pets  and  entertainment  is  interesting. In  around  1990  somethings, Sony  you  know  Sony  is  good  in entertainment  business  game,  music. They  came  up  with  a  concepts called  pets  entertainment. That  means  you  can you  come  up  with  a  robotic  pet? Nowadays,  because  some  of  us  live  in  cities. Your  parents  may  not  allow  you  to  keep  a  pet, but  robotic  pets  may  be  possible. At  that  time,  they  came  up  with this  concept  to  try to  sell  the  robotics  pat. But  unfortunately,  there  are  two  ahead  of time  and  the  course  was  not  right  yet. So  it  was  not  that  successful, but  it's  a  nice  idea because  they  believe  that the  definitions  of  entertainment  should not  be  narrowly  limited to  just  games  and  music. Robotics  technology  can  come  in to  improve  the  definitions  of  entertainment. His  service  this  figure  over  here shows  a  human  noi  robots. Nowadays,  we  see  a  lot of  videos  on  human  noise, but  this  robot  was actually  invented  by  Honda. Honda  is  known  for  making  car. Very  few  people  know  that they  make  human  noid  robots, also  around  the  same  period,  1996. Because  the  Japanese  thinks that  rather  than  spending the  money  into  advertisement, because  to  promote  your  car, you  need  to  advertise,  right? Rather  than  spending  the  money into  advertisements, they  use  this  money  in  R&D to  invest  in  this  human  noi  robots. The  idea  is  that  human noid  robots  is  interesting. If  you  bring  this  human  noid  robot to  the  automobile  show,  right, all  the  crowds  will  gather  around  your  booth, and  everybody  will  know  the  brand  of  Honda. So  this  is  quite  interesting  concept. Rather  than  putting  your  money directly  into  advertisements, which  will  come  to  the  waste. Can  you  have  other  more  innovative  way of  advertising  your  product, at  the  same  time,  also  be  able to  invest  in  a  new  product, possible  new  products? So  for  example,  This  could  be  personal  robot. We  have  personal  computers, personal  hand  phone. If  you  can  come  up  with  a  low  cost  robot, which  can  follow  you  around and  you  can  store  your  data. You  can  transfer  your  photos  to  it, display  it,  and  you can  do  some  simple  thing  for  you. It's  actually  quite  interesting. This  is  another  potential  area, personal  robots, which  can  eventually  replace  everything. In  simple  service. Medicines.  Again,  this  was  not  new,  1998, where  a  university,  I think  it  is  University  of  Adinburt, came  out  with  a  robotic  arm, interface  to  real  human. Right,  real  humans,  and  usually, people  start  to  do some  experiment  with  monkeys. They  start  the  monkeys  and put  some  fruits  somewhere  to  see whether  monkeys  eventually  will  be  able  to manipulate  the  robot's  arms to  reach  for  the  foods. And  basically,  it  was  quite  successful. All  these  are  very  useful  because  if  you have  someone  who  is  handicapped  lost  the  arm, lost  the  hand,  right,  eventually, they  will  be  able  to  use  robotic  arms. And  nowadays,  you  also see  exoskeletons,  right? I  went  to  China  recently, and  at  some  mountains, they  actually  have  some exoskeletons  for  rental, which  means  that  if  you could  not  climb  up  the  mountains  two  week, you  can  actually  put  on  this  robotics  device so  that  you  can  also enjoy  the  beautiful  scenery. So  robots  are  meant  to  help  human  beings. Finally,  Finally, one  more  application  is  autonomous  car. Autonomous  car  is  a  result of  a  robotics  research. And  for  those  who  like  driving, you  may  wonder  why  you  do we  need  autonomous  car. But  suppose  that  you  think  of a  point  of  view  of  blind  people, they  won't  be  able  to  drive the  car  and  old  people, they  have  trouble  driving  the  cars. This  kind  of  technology is  actually  very  useful. They  just  have  to  step  into  the  car, some  so  language  interactions nowadays  it's  possible and  set  your  destinations, where  you  want  to  go,  and the  autonomous  car  will  bring  you  there. So  all  these  are  just  some  examples  of some  robot  applications  as well  as  emerging  technologies. In  fact,  as  I  said, all  these  technologies  actually came  out  from  robotics  quite  long  ago. The  reasons  that  you  don't  see  them  in the  factories  or  house is  because  a  few  factors.  Right? Firstly,  the  cost,  it  must  be attractive  enough  for  everyone  to  buy,  right? Suppose  that  you  buy  hand  phone, the  price  is  not  affordable. I  may  not  widely  reach  out  to  everyone. Hey,  the  other  reason  is that  there  are  some  safety  issue, which  is  very  hard  to  sort  out. For  example,  if  you  use a  drone  to  do  delivery, it  is  actually  possible  technology,  correct? But  what  happened  if  the  drone  dropped  down? Hit  someone  who  is  going  to  be  responsible. So  there  are  some  insurance issue  regulations, right,  which  are  not  quite  settled  yet. So  all  these  must  be settled  together  with  the  technology. Next,  let's  just  go  through some  robot  specifications  quickly. How  do  we  specify  the  robots, is  based  on  the  several  factors. Number  of  axis,  limits the  number  of  degree  of  freedoms. Bow  carrying  capacities, speed,  reach  and  stroke, two  orientation, repeatability,  precision  accuracy, as  well  as  operating  environment. Number  of  axis,  etc  is  the  number of  degree  of  freedoms,  the  number  of  joints, that  the  robot  has,  and  it  can  vary  from a  few  degree  of  freedoms to  multiple  degree  of  freedoms. Usually  is  4-6  is  sufficient. More  than  six,  we  said  it is  a  redundant  robot. Y,  six  because  we  are  operating  in a  three  dimensional  space,  x  y,  z, three  d.  But  don't  forget  that  you  have, rotation  about  x, rotation  about  y,  rotation  about  z. Therefore,  to  achieve  a  task in  a  three  dimensional  space, you  need  six  degree  of  freedom, three  for  positions,  three  for  orientations. This  is  called  arbitrary position  and  orientation. That  means  any  position,  any  orientation. If  you  have  more  than  six  like  human  joints, This  is  called  redundant  robots. Redundant  robots  means  that you  have  more  than  necessary. You  only  need  six  but  you  have  more  than  six. But  however,  this  give  you some  flexibility  in  your  task. In  some  tasks,  you  may need  to  avoid  obstacles. Go  around  some  obstacles  at  the  same  time, reach  for the  desired  position  and  orientations, and  you  need  extra  degree  of  freedom. We  call  redundant  degree  of  freedom. Now,  capacity  and  speed ignore  the  figures  over there  because  this  is  always  changing. Depending  on  your  load  carrying  capacity, if  you  need  light  load, no  need  to  invest heavily  in  a  robot  that  can  carry  heavy  load, buy  a  cheaper  robot. Same  thing,  the  speed  also  vary. Some  can  operate  very  fast  for high  speed  application  while some  may  be  quite  slow. He  reach  and  stroke  is just  a  rough  estimation  of  your  workspace. If  you  stretch  out  the  factors, vertically,  that's  called  the  vertical  ridge. If  you  make  the  wich  travel  horizontally, hey,  the  possible  distance  is called  the  horizontal  stroke. Similarly,  we  can  define the  maximum  ache  vertically, which  is  called  vertical  ridge and  the  vertical  stroke, which  is  basically  the  distance that  be  travel  vertically. So  this  is  give  you  a  rough estimation  of  the  workspace. That  means  that  you  can  roughly estimate  what  is  your workspace  envelopes  through  this. Now  orientation,  as  I  said, the  minor  axis  define  your  orientation  and because  we  are  operating  in a  three  dimensional  space, so  therefore,  you  need at  least  three  degree  of  freedom, T  degree  of  freedom  for  positions, three  degree  of  freedom  for  the  orientations. This  figure  over  here  show three  independents, joint  axis,  they  are per  pentacle  to  each  other, and  it's  called  the  your  pitch  role. Now,  if  you  rotate your  any  factors  respect  to  this  axis. This  is  called  your  axis,  right? Imagine  there's  a  motel  there  rotating  it. This  is  called  r.  Now, suppose  that  you  rotate  about  this  axis, another  independent  axis, you  actually  perform some  motions  similar  to  throwing  some  bombs. This  is  called  pitching  motions. Lastly,  the  last  joint  is  actually  causing a  rotation  rotations  of  your  en  factors. That  means  that  you  can  rotate this  factors  to  orientate the  flat  pers  with some  flat  surfaces  so as  to  pick  up  the  parts, more  in  a  more  stable  manner. T  independent  axis  give you  independent  controls  of the  orientations  of  these  factors. This  means  that  you  basically  can  coordinate these  three  joints  to  achieve any  orientation  in  the  three  dimension  space. Now,  repeatability  accuracy  and  precision one  grants  it  looks similar.  They  are  all  different. Repeatability  means  the  ability to  repeat  the  operations, that  means  the  positioning of  your  end  e  factor. Repeatability  is  important  because industrial  robots  are used  for  repetitive  tasks. That  means  you  perform the  same  operation  over  and  over  again. Imagine  that  it  is  not  repeatable. First  three  times  were  very  accurate. After  operating  for  1,000  times, it  drifted  to  another  location. This  Illustrations  over  here  show someone  who  is  repeatable  but  not  accurate. That  means  that  you're shooting  at  the  wrong  place,  right? Doing  the  wrong  thing  over  and  over  again. Now,  accuracy  is  important. It  means  that  you  need  to  be  able to  reach  the  desired  positions  that  you  want. Non  repeatable  means  that  sometimes  you are  here  right  but  sometimes  you're  outside. Sometimes  you  are  too  far  away  or it  could  be  drifting  after  some  time. Initially,  it  was  quite  okay. After  some  time,  it  drifted to  another  location. Now  presistence  is  not the  accuracy  is  a  resolution. Robot  cannot  move  in  any  resolution. It  has  a  smaller  distance that  your  end  eftor  can  travel. If  you  require  micro  scale  accuracy, you  need  a  micro  manipulators. All  this  we  set the  specifications  of  your  robots, and  all  this  also  means  different  costs. Lastly,  just  to  caution you  that  suppose  that  you  want  to automate  something  in a  clean  room  environment,  making  IC, but  you  cannot  just  purchase a  normal  robot  because  the  robots  must  be made  to  satisfy the  clean  room  environment, which  is  very  stringent. As  a  result,  the  cost  of  your  robot will  also  be  higher. That  means  that  if  you  want  to operate  in  the  clean  room  environment, you  must  basically  tell the  suppliers  that  you want  to  meet  this  requirement. And  of  course, it  will  come  with  a  higher  cost. Now,  the  Chapter  one, is  just  for  your  information,  right? Do  not  try  to  remember all  these  technical  specifications, et  cetera. It  is  just  to  highlight  to  you  that after  you  graduate  suppose that  you  want  to  use  the  robots, how  should  you  go  about  sing  the  robots? It's  actually  based  on  a  set  of  criterias, applications,  right  and  what kind  of  task  that  you  want  to  perform? Now,  let  us  start  with  the  first  main  topics, Kinematics,  kinematics  is the  most  basic  topics  in  robotics. All  classes  of  robotics start  by  studying  kinematics. Now,  before  we  look  at  kinematics, let  us  understand  how a  robot  manipulator  works. Basically,  robot  manipulators  has actuators,  such  as  models. Actuators  is  used  to  drive  joints. As  you  send  a  signal  from  your  computers, To  the  motels,  you will  start  to  rotate.  This  is  controller. Controller  send  a  signal  to  the  motels, you'll  start  to  move  the  joint, and  the  joint  will  start  to  move  the  links. Robot  consists  of  multiple  joints, multiple  links. At  the  end  of  the  robot, there  is  a  factor. Usually  it's  a  grip  pose. I  some  come  with  multi  finger  hand, depending  on  the  application. The  other  end  is  usually  fixed, but  you  can  also  mount  it on  some  mobile  platforms. In  fact,  human  noid  robots, you  mount  it  on  a  legal  platform. This  can  be  treated  as one  arm  of  the  human  noid  robot  as  well. So  the  objective  is  actually  to  control the  factor  through  the  joint. That  means,  how  do  we  control  the  joints? So  that  so  as  to coordinate  the  joints  in  such  a  way that  the  end  factor  move in  a  predefined  mandu. This  is  quite  a  complex  design where  we  actually  need  to  moderate. He  For  human  beings, you  don't  feel  it  because  when you  were  at  a  very  young  age, you  actually  learned  all  this  and it  was  connected  to your  neuron  networks  in  your  brain. That  enable  you  to  do some  coordinations  of  the  arms  very  easily. But  robot  is  a  machines,  right? It  should  be  programmed  by  human. Human  need  to  tell  you  exactly  what  to  do. In  order  to  do  that,  you  need  to first  study  the  kinematics. The  kinematics  depends  on the  types  of  joints  that  you  use. Just  now,  I  mentioned  that there  are  two  types  of  joint, revue  joint  and  the  prismatic  joints. Different  joint  types  and how  they  are  connected  will  give  you different  work  space  as well  as  different  kinematics. The  objective  here,  is  to  control the  positions  and  orientations of  the  tools  in  the  three  dimensional  space, not  only  positions,  but you  need  to  orientate  the  part. And  in  order  to  do  that,  we  must  first  derive a  mathematical  model  that  give  you the  relationship  between  the  joint  variables and  the  positions  and orientations  of  the  joint. Kinematics  model  is  basically  nothing but  to  derive  a  model,  a  mathematical  model, so  that  given  the  joint  angles, if  you  key  in  the  joint  angles  to  this  model, You  can  use  this  model to  calculate  or  predict the  positions  and  orientations of  your  factors. This  is  a  key  idea.  Let  me show  you  an  animation. Okay.  For  example,  right? Suppose  that  I  want  to  know. If  Joint  one,  two, three  is  ten,  20, 30  degrees,  Joint  four,  five, six  or  zero  degree, where  will  be  the  positions  of  this  i  factor? One  way  is  that  you  manually  move  it. Manually  move  it  to  that  location. And  record  it. Sometimes  this  is  called  teach  and  playback, but  there's  a  more  systematic  way that  we  will  learn  here. Hey,  we  want  to  derive  a  model. The  use  this  model. When  I  key  in  this  input  to  the  model,  102030 Okay,  I'll  be  able  to calculate  the  position and  orientation  in  advance, in  advance  without  having  to  move the  physical  robots  or simulate  it.  This  is  the  objective. We'd  to  come  up  with  a  models. So  that  given  any  joint  angles, not  just  this  examples. Given  any  joint  angles, I  can  use  it  to  calculate  the  positions and  orientations  of  any  factors. This  is  the  basic  objective of  modeling  the  kinematics. Now,  I  will  start  with  simplest  examples. Just  one  joint  and  one  link  of  a  robot. Of  course, actual  robot  will  not  be  that  simple. Imagine  that  here  you  have a  motel  which  will  rotate  this  link. A  motor  which  will  rotate  this  link. This  link  has  a  link  fixed  link  length  of  L, and  this  is  variable. That  means  that  you  can  rotate  to  be any  positions  in  this  two  dimensional  space. Forward  kinematics  basically  means  part, given  this  join  anle find  the  positions  and  orientation. For  this  simple  robot, we  can  actually  write  down the  kinematics  models based  on  simple  mathematics. Because  x  is  sine. Y  is  sine  them. We  can  actually  model  it  very  quickly. But  imagine  that  you  have a  robot  with  multiple  degree  of  freedoms. It  will  be  very  hard  to  write  down the  four  kinematics  equation  by inspection  because  it  involves multiple  joints. Multiple  joints  and  multiple  links. Therefore,  we  need  to  have a  very  systematic  way  of  driving the  forward  kinematics  of the  robot  so  that  we  can  use this  model  to  predict the  positions  and  orientations  of  the  robot. And  of  course,  you  can  see  that  you required  some  mathematics,  linear  algebra, as  well  as  a  matrix as  well  as  transformations here  to  model  this  four  kinematics  model. Let's  review  some  of the  basic  concepts  that  everybody learned  in  a universities  undergraduate  course. Here,  suppose  that  P  is a  vectors  in  a  n  dimensional  space, and  let  a  set  of  vector  x  one, x  two  to  x  n  be  complete  autonomous  set. These  are  the  definitions  in  mathematics saying  that  all  these  vectors are  perpendicular, making  90  degree  with  respect  to  each other  and  they  are  unit  vectors. Unit  vectors  means  that all  of  them  has  a  length  of  one. Basically,  this  means  that  it  is the  basis  for  the  vector in  the  n  dimensional  space. The  coordinates  of  the  vectors, with  respect  to  each  of  these  axis, can  be  obtained  by  dot  product. Of  this  P.  P  is  actually a  linear  combinations  of  the  basic  vectors, which  means  that  you  express  the  coin the  vectors  in  the  end  dimensional  space  as a  linear  combinations  of all  these  basic  vectors, and  then  you  take the  dot  product  with  respect  to  each of  the  of  the  basic  axis, you  actually  get  the  coordinates. Now,  sounds  mathematical, but  actually  something  everybody  knows, except  that  this  is  more  general. Let's  reduce  it  to  a  two  dimensional  space in  a  two  dimensional  space. You  have  x  one,  x  two. So  this  is  two  dimensional  space. Therefore,  you  only  have  two  basic  vectors. I  actually  called  the  x  y  axis,  correct? X  Y  axis.  Here,  we  call  x1x2. X1x2.  It  can  be  x y  z  in  three  dimensional  space. Therefore,  we  know  that Any  vectors  in the  two  dimensional  space  such  as  this  one, can  be  expressed  as a  linear  combinations  of these  two  basic  vectors. Very  easy  to  understand. If  you  take  the  dot  products  of this  vector,  for  example, if  you  take  the  dot  product  of this  vector  with  one  of  the  basic  vectors, basically  what  you  get  is this  codinate  along  the  horizontal  axis. You  take  the  dot  product with  respect  to  X  two, You  get  a  coordinate,  respect to  the  horizontal  axis. In  general,  this  is  defined  over  here. You  can  just  refer  to  this  simple  examples. While  we  go  through this  more  general  concepts  and work  it  out  right  then  you'll  be able  to  understand  it  better. Now  back  to  robot,  three  dimensional  space. Remember  that  you  want  to  control the  positions  of  the  robot in  a  three  dimensional  space. We  live  in  the  physical  world, which  is  actually  a  three  dimensional  space. But  in  order  to  have  orientations, we  need  another  three  degree  of  freedom. But  the  code  is  actually three  dimensional,  x  y, z,  rotation  about  x  y  N  z. It's  just  that  here  we  call X  one,  X  two,  X  three. The  xs  which  are per  particular  to  each  other, and  they  are  unit  vectors. Remember  they  are  unit  vectors. This  form  a  autonomal  set. Now,  here  I  use  F  to  denote fix  to  denote  mobile. Why  do  we  need  to  define two  types  of  coordinates  is because  robots  consist  of both  types  of  coordinates. One  is  a  fixed  codinate, which  is  attached  to  the  base. This  fix  this  will  not be  moving  with  your  joints. And  this  is  of the  world  coordinates  for the  robots,  World  coordinates. You  robot  will  issue commands  with  respect  to  this  coordinates. At  every  joints, especially  at  the  end  effectors, you  have  another  coordinate, which  is  attached  to  the  end  factor. So  therefore,  when  the  joint  move, your  end  eftor  will  move, and  therefore,  your  coordinates attached  to  the  end  factor  will  also  move. So  therefore,  it  is  called  mobile  coordinate. There  are  two  types  of coordinates,  fixed  coordinate  F, mobile  coin,  each  is  three  degree  of  freedom. Let  us  differentiate  them  by  putting the  basic  vectors  as F  one,  F  two,  have  three. And  then  M  one, m2m3,  three  independent  axis. Remember  that  any  vectors  in a  three  dimensional  space  can be  expressed  as  a  linear  combination. Of  the  basic  factors,  and  P  one, p2p3,  are  called  the  coordinates in  the  three  dimensional  space. That  means  that  what is  the  length  along  F  one  axis? What  is  the  length  along  f2f3 axis  respectively. My  coordinates  can  be expressed  in  terms  of the  fixed  coordinate  frame. But  here,  let  us  consider  that  we  have a  mobile  coordinate,  M  1m2m3, A,  which  is  rotated with  respect  to  the  origin of  this  fixed  frame. They  are  not  the  same.  Is  slightly  rotated. And  suppose  that  Someone is  sitting  in  the  mobile  frame, looking  at  the  same  positions, you  have  a  different  coordinates, which  is  something  like  this, will  be  equal  to  M  one, m2m3,  A  P  one,  P  two,  P  three. It  is  something  very  easy  to  understand. Imagine  that  you're  sitting inside  your  car  and you  look  at  everything  inside  your  car  will be  respect  to  the  mobile  coordinates,  right? Because  you're  moving  together  with  the  car. But  if  someone  is  outside  the  car, When  it  is  looking  at the  same  thing  inside your  car  while  your  car is  moving  or  rotating, you  will  not  be  the  same. But  however,  both  of you  are  looking  at  the  same  point. Here  I  define  the  same  point with  two  different  coordinates. One  is  a  fixed  coordinate,  not  moving. The  other  one  is  rotating. Rotating  such  as  the  joint, rotating,  and  I  can  get  the  second  equation. So  I  label  this  equation. With  any  numbers,  then  I proceed  to  find  a  transformation  matrix. Here  is  a  rotation  transformation  matrix. So  that  given  any  coordinates in  the  mobile  frame, I  can  use  this  transformation  metric, rotation  transformation  matrix  to find  a  coordinate, with  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. That  means  that  if  you know  the  positions  of something  inside  the  car, after  the  car  has  rotated, if  you  know  the  models, you  can  actually  use  it  to  calculate  and  tell someone  outside  that  this  is the  position,  right  with  respect  to  you. So  this  is  what  we  are  doing  here. And  what  is  the  coordinate? Remember  that  coordinates  is a  dot  product  of  your  vector, with  respect  to  each  of  the  axis. If  you're  confused,  go  back  to  this  example. You  take  the  dot  product, Onto  this  axis,  you  get  this  coordinate, which  is  basically  this  length. In  the  three  dimensional  space, you  need  to  do  it  three  times. One  is  respect  to  F  one  axis, F  two  axis  and  F  three  axis. Now,  remember  that  just  now, we  have  expressed  P in  terms  of  two  coordinates. In  terms  of  fixed  and  mobile  coordinate. Suppose  that  I  substitute P  in  terms  of  the  mobile  coordinate, that  means  that  let's  put  this  into  here. Then  you  give  me  these  three  equations. Just  a  substitution  into  it. What  these  three  equations give  is  the  relationship  between your  fixed  coordinate and  the  mobile  coordinates. In  each  equation,  you  can see  that  you  have  P  one, p2p3,  respect  to  the  mobile  coordinate. Next,  if  you  take  out this  mobile  coordinate  and put  it  into  the  vector, then  the  remaining  transformations can  be  arranged  into  a three  time  three  matrix. Very  easy  to  check. Multiplied  by  this  matrix  multiplication, multiply  by  this, plus  this  multiplied  by  this, basically  give  you  the  first  equation. Give  you  the  first  equation. Second  equations  also  similarly. If  you  multiply  second  row  by  that  vectors. You  give  you  the  second  equations, and  lastly,  third  equations can  be  similarly  stated. What  we  are  doing  here  is  that  we  have  found a  transformation  matrix  in a  general  form  so  that given  the  coordinates  in  the  mobile  frame, we  can  use  it  to  find the  coordinates  in  the  fixed  spring,  right? And  this  is  a  very  general  form. That  means  that  if  you  take  the  dot product  between  each  axis, you  can  always  find a  rotational  transformation. But  this  is  general,  but  not  easy  to  use it  for  driving  the  kinematics  of  the  robots. Kinematics  of  the  robots, remember,  is  operating  in a  three  dimensional  space. You  have  three  axis,  one,  two,  three. And  then  you  have  rotation  about  first  axis, rotation  about  second  axis, rotation  about  third  axis. Only  three  rotation. Now,  we  therefore  define something  we  call  fundamental rotational  metric. By  rotating  respect  to  one  of  the  axis. For  example,  if  you  rotate. If  you  rotate  about  the  first  axis, first  axis  is  here, Suppose  that  you  have two  frame  initially  coincide. That  means,  imagine  that  you have  M  1m2m3  as  well. They  are  initially  the  same. And  you  rotate  it  rotate  it  by  angle  five, respect  to  first  axis. If  you  rotate  it  respect to  first  axis  obviously, M  one  will  not  move,  correct? M  one  will  stay  with  F  one. M  one  does  not  change, but  M  two  and  M  three  will  change. I  is  rotated  with  respect  to the  first  axis  by  an  angle  five. We  want  to  represent  this  rotation  about the  first  axis  by a  transformation  matrix mathematically,  right? Firstly,  if  this  is  fine, This  is  also,  easy  to  understand. This  is  rotated,  is also  rotated  by  the  same  angle. This  is  90  degree  because these  are  autonomous  set perpendicular  to  each  other,  x  y  z. Therefore,  this  angle  marked  in rig  is  90  degree  minus  five. Derive  all  the  angles between  each  of  the  basic  vectors. We  can  get  all  the  angles between  each  of  the  basic  vectors. Why  is  the  angle  between  F  one  and  10? Because  it's  not  rotated, with  respect  to  that  exist. Now,  bear  this  in  mind  and  go  back to  the  general  transformation matrix  that  we  have  derived. We  can  now  use  this  angle to  derive  a  specific  transformation  matrix. How  does  dot  product  relate  to  angle? This  required  the  reviews  of  dot  products. If  you  have  two  vectors and  you  want  to  take  the  dot  product, it's  equal  to  minit  of  the  vectors. Mitude  of  the  vectors, multiply  by  the  cosine of  the  angle  between  them. This  is  what  you learn  in  undergraduate  level. Remember,  F  and  are  all  basic  vectors. That  means  that  they  are  unit  vector. The  manitue  is  equal  to  one. For  example,  F  one  is  a  100. F  two  is  at  010. F  two  and  then  followed  by  F  three, x  y,  z,  x  is  equal  to  one. F  two,  y  is  equal  to  one. F  three,  z  is  equal  to  one. Univector  means  that  the magnitude  is  equal  to  one. This  two  will  simplify  to  one, and  therefore,  unit  sea. This  means  that  the  dot  products  of two  unit  vector  is simply  the  cosine  of  the  angle  between  them. This  explain  why  we  look  at all  the  angles  between all  these  basic  vectors. Let  us  return  to this  fundamental  transformation  matrix, rotational  transformation  matrix  one, which  is  rotation  respect  to  the  first  axis. If  it  is  rotating  respect  to the  first  axis,  obviously, the  angle  is  equal  to  zero, B  F  one  is  equal  to  one. If  the  angle  is  equal  to  zero, then  cosine  zero  is  equal  to  one. This  explain  why  you  have  one  to. Which  is  a  dot  product between  two  unit  vectors. It's  only  the  cosine  of the  angle  angle  is  equal  to  zero. For  some  other  vectors  is  equal  to  zero, if  they  are  perpendicular,  like  this. I  is  perpendicular  to  this. That  means  that  F  one  is perpendicular  to  M  two  and  three.  90  degree. This  explain  why  you  have  zero over  here  and  one similarly  is  also  perpendicular to  F  two  and  M  three. Therefore,  all  this  reduces  to  zero. Ix,  E  five,  look at  the  dot  product  between  F  two  and  M  two. This  is  F  two,  this  is  M  two,  angle  is  five. So  obviously,  you  have  cosigned  fine. Similarly  for  M  three  and  F  three, the  angle  is  also  five, and  this  explain  why  we  get  cosine  five. Finally,  last  two  elements. The  angle  between  F  two  and  M  three, F  two  is  this, M  three  is  this,  therefore, is  90  degree  plus  point. And  you  take  sine  of  90  degree  plus  point, you'll  become  or  it  can  be simplified  into  negative  sine  pi. The  angle  between  F  two  and  M  two,  F  two  is. F  two  and  M  two, Inga  between  them  is  90  minus  five. If  it's  90  minus  and  you  take  cosine. To  take  the  dot  product, take  cosine,  90  minus  pi  is  sine  five. You  can  just  press  calculator  and  check. This  basically  means  that  I  can  derive the  other  two  and  negative  f. I'll  just  show  you  the  derivations  of this  fundamental  rotational transformation  matrix  respect to  the  first  axis,  Now, you  should  go  back  to  try  to  derive the  fundamental  rotation  about second  axis  and  the  fundamental  rotation about  the  third  axis. I'll  leave  it  as  an  exercise. That  means  that  just  look  at the  relationship,  the  angle  between  them, substitute  into this  general  transformation  matrix, to  see  whether  you  can  dive  this. One  observations  of this  transformation  matrix for  your  information  is  that. The  cave  row  and  ve  column  of this  transformation  matrix  is  actually the  dity  matrix  K  row and  column  of  the  dy  matrix. For  example,  Idi  matrix  means  what? A  diagonal  elements  one  of  diagonal  r  zero. You  can  see  that  r  two,  k  go  to  two. Is  second  row  and second  column  of  the  dy  matrix, R  three  is  the  third  row  and third  columns  of  the  identity  matrix. This  is  quite  easy  to understand  because  anything multiply  by  identity  matrix  is  the  same. If  you  have  a  coinate,  multiply Idity  matrix,  it  remain  the  same. Id  matrix  means no  transform,  no  transformation. Therefore,  if  you  have  second  row, second  columns  equal  to the  second  row  and  second column  of  the  Idity  matrix, that  means  that  it  is  not  rotating. Right?  Whereas  second  axis  is  not  rotating. I  remain  the  same.  In  fact, you're  rotating  respect  to  the  second  axis. R  three,  you're  rotating respect  to  the  third  axis, so  third  axis  will  remain  the  same,  right? The  other  just  some  very  simple  properties that  you  can  use to  identify  what  kind  of  transformations  is that  the  diagonal  elements are  always  consigned. If  you  go  back  to  this  again,  diagonal. Imagine  that  you  have  few of  the  identity  metrics. The  other  two,  will  always  be cosine  of  diagonal  one  means these  two  are  always  sine. But  that  is  plus  and  minus. How  do  we  determine  this  price and  minus  is  negative one  to  the  power  of  k  for  the  one  on  top. That  means  above  the  diagonal  elements. For  example,  if  k  is  to  two, Here  you  put  a  positive  sign. Once  this  is  positive, the  other  one  will  be  negative. Over  here,  k  equal  to  three. Therefore,  there's  a  negative  sign  over  here. Need  not  worry  too  much. This  is  just  something  that  you  can  observe in  all  the  transformation  matrices. Now,  let  us  look  at  one  example. Suppose  that  you  have  a  mobile  frame which  is  rotated  about  the  fixed  sprain, about  the  fixed  frame  by first  axis  of  the  fixed  frame by  angle  Pi  over  three. Here  I  the  coordinates  of  a  point  in the  mobile  frames  are  given  as  203, that  means  that  someone  moving together  with  a  mobile  frame, looking  at  this  location  203, respect  to  first  second  and  third  axis, here  you  want  to  find  out  what  will  be the  coordinates  of the  same  point  in  the  fixed  bring after  this  mobile  frame  has  been  rotated  by Pi  over  three  respect to  the  first  axis  of  the  fixed  bring. Firstly,  you  retrieve this  fundamental rotational  transformation  matrix, and  then  you  substitute  Pi  into  it. And  then  the  press  calculators. You  give  you  this  multiplied by  the  coordinate  given  to  you. You  can  check  that. You  can  get  negative  2.598, 1.5  for  F  one,  F  three. This  is  respect  to  the  fixed  string. That  means  that  once  we  get all  these  matrixs, we  can  use  that  to  calculate  the  relationship between  the  fixed  coordinates and  the  mobile  coordinates. So  far,  we  have  derived three  fundamental  rotational  matrices, that  given the  coordinate  respect  to  the  mobile  frame, we  can  multiply  by this  transformation  matrix  to  get the  coordinate  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. But  in  some  cases, you  may  need  to  find  the  reverse. Reverse  means  that  given  PF  int, he  on  to  find  the codinate  respect  to  the  mobile  frame. And  it  can  be  simply  calculated  in  this  way, using  the  inverse  matrix. Inverse  matric  is  the  inverse  transformation, reverse  transformations  to  convert it  the  other  way  round. Now,  usually  to  calculate  the  inverse  matrix, remember  that  it's  quite  tedious,  usually, you  need  to  calculate  determinant and  the  join  matrix. This  is  the  basic  definitions. Or  you  can  use  some  numerical  methods. Unfortunately, for  all  these  transformation  metrics, the  inverse  matrix  is  simply  the  transpose. Transpose  means  that  you move  the  row  to  become  column, column  become  row,  right? Row  become  con,  Column  become  row. For  example,  this  second  row. After  you  rotate  it,  you  will  become the  second  column  of  your  matrix, and  that  will  be  the  inverse  matrix. It's  actually  quite easy  to  understand  because inverse  matrix  can  be defined  this  way  as  well. Remember,  this  is  r  deter,  angle. Inverse  matrix  actually  you can  put  r  negative  deter. R  negatively.  Why  is  it  so? Now,  suppose  that  you  have  a  matrix R.  Inverse  matrix  means  what? If  you  multiply  Rr  by  the  inverse  matrix, you  get  dility  matrix. Basic  definitions  of  inverse. Now  what  is  identity  matrix? No  change.  In  terms of  transformation,  it  means  no  change. In  terms  of  rotations, suppose  that  you  have  rotated  by angle  to  go  back to  the  same  position,  no  change. You  need  to  rotate  it  back.  Right? Suppose  that  you  rotate  90  degree. How  do  you  go  back  to  the  original  position? No  change?  You  rotate backwards  by  the  same  angle. And  exactly,  you  can  see  from  here that  if  you  put  negative  angle  throughout. Because  negative  five  is  still  cosine  five. Well,  sine  negative  five or  become  negative  sine  five. The  effect  is  equivalent to  just  taking  the  transpose  of  the  matrix. Next  time,  if  you  want  to calculate  the  inverse of  fundamental  rotational  transformation. Remember,  you  need  not  calculate the  determinance  and  the  adjoint  matrix. Even  if  you  do  so, you'll  give  you  the  same  thing, which  is  simply  the  transpose  of  the  matrix. Inverse  transformations  can  be obtained  by  the  transpose or  substituting  negative  angle  into  it. Let's  look  at  another  example. Suppose  that  you  are  given a  coordinate  e  in  the  fixed  frame  340. Using  the  same  example  in  the  previous  case, what  are  the  coordinate  respect to  the  mobile  frame? This  means  now  you  do  the  other  way round,  given  F  fixed. Fine.  The  coordinates respect  to  the  mobile  frame. Which  means  that  you  go  back  to this  transformation  matrix  over here  in  the  previous  example. This  one,  and  then  just  take  the  transpose. Which  means  row  become  column  column  become. After  taking  the  transpose, you  multiply by  the  coordinates  in  the  fixed  frame. That  will  give  you  the  coordinate in  mobile  frame. Okay,  next,  let  us look  at  composite  rotation. Composite  rotation  means a  sequence  of  rotation. We  have  studied  fundamental rotational  transformation  metrics with  respect  to  first  axis, second  axis,  and  third  axis. Using  this  fundamental rotational  transformations, you  can  use  it  to  describe any  rotational  transformation. Rotation  about  first  second  and  third, and  this  will  require multiplications  of  the  matrices. Because  matrix  multiplication  do  not  commute. Mathematically,  it  means  if you  have  two  matrices  A  B, A  times  B  is  not  equal  to  b times  A  unless  they  are  diagonal  matrix. Therefore,  if  you  multiply  wrongly, it  give  you different  meaning  of  the  transformation. So  in  order  to  get the  correct  transformations. We  need  to  follow  this  rules, which  is  for  composite  rotations. Now,  imagine  that  initially, you  have  two  you  have a  mobile  frame  and  a  fixed  frame, which  are  coincide,  means that  no  transformation,  no  rotation. If  there's  no  rotations, then  it's  identity  metric. No  change.  Now,  suppose  that the  mobile  frame  is  now  rotated  by  an  angle, respect  to  one  axis  of  the  fixed  frame. K  can  be  one,  two,  or  three. Three  fundamental  rotations. Depending  on  which  axis, then  you  pre  multiply. I  is  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. But  suppose  that  is respect  to  the  mobile  frames, its  own  axis,  then  you  need  to  post multiply  because  it's the  reverse  operation  now. In  this  case,  then by  following  this  sequence, we'll  be  able  to  describe this  sequence  of  rotations  based on  the  multiplications  of all  three  fundamental rotational  transformation. For  example,  If  you  have  a  mobile  frame, which  is  rotated  by  angle  five, respect  to  F  two, second  axis  of  the  fixed  frame. Then,  we  have  another  rotations, which  is  about  the  third  axis of  the  mobile  frame  M  three. In  this  case,  finally,  we  have  one  more, which  is  about  the  first  axis  of the  mobile  frame,  by  another  angle. What  will  be  a  single rotational  transformation  matrix, which  describe  this  sequence  of  rotation, which  is  basically  described by  this  composite  rule. Let  me  show  you  in  sequence. First,  you  put an  ID  matrix,  A,  which  is  this  one. That  means  initially  they  are  coin  the  s. Then  everything  is  respect  to  this  reference. He  suppose  that  you  have a  rotation  about  the  fixed  frame, you  pre  multiply. This  is  r  two.  Beta.  Pre  multiplier. He  suppose  that  with  respect  to  mobile  axis, you  must  pose  multiply.  I  is  a  reference. In  this  case,  it  will  be  r  three. Angle  will  be  equal  to. Lastly,  the  last  one  also  mobile. You  follow  by  another  post  multiplication, which  is  R  one  Alpha. When  you  multiply  them  together, you  get  one  single  transformation  matrix, which  describe  this  sequence  of  rotation. When  you  have  fixed  frames, respect  to  fixed  pre  multiply, respect  to  mobile  frame,  the  post  multiplier. Let's  look  at  another  example, the  orientation  right. Remember  that  you have  three  independent  axis, your  pitch  and  row, which  is  the  rotations  about  first  axis, second  axis,  and  axis, with  respect  to  the  fixed  brim. Suppose  that  we  have  a  sequence  of  rotation. Firstly,  there's  a  rotation  about  fixed, F  one  by  your  angle, we  call  it  theta  one,  followed  by F  two  with  an  angle  of  Data  two. Lastly,  F  three  with  an  angle  of  Data  three, and  all  this  is  respect  to  what  fixed  exists. This  means  that  you  start  with  i, and  you  do  the  first  transformation first,  which  is  F  one. Pre  multiply.  Then  second  transformations is  also  with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. You  pre  multiply.  The  last  transformations, also  with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame, you  pre  multiply  again. And  after  that,  we  write  down all  the  three  fundamental rotational  transformations, and  we  multiply  them  together. We  can  get  a  single  transformation  matrix. In  fact,  from  here,  you  can  see the  characteristic  quite  easily. This  is  the  first  row  first  column of  the  IDD  matrix. So  therefore,  these  are  one. Second  row,  second  column  two. Third  row  columns,  r  three, because  they  are  rotating respect  to  that  axis, meaning  that  there's  no  transformation. The  transformations  will  only transform  the  other  two  axis. Multiply  them  together and  then  simplifying  it, you  can  check  that  it's  equal  to  this, So  what  is  this  matrix? This  matrix  means  that  I  can  use this  to  predict  the  rotations  of  my  factor. After  a  sequence  of  rotations  in  this  form, your  pitch  and  row  by  any  angles, which  means  that  given  T  one,  T  two, the  three,  your  pitch  row  angle,  any  angle, I  can  use  it  to  find the  transformation  matrix  and  then use  it  to  find  the  orientations of  your  en  factors. So  this  is  examples of  kinematics  equation  actually. Even  though  we  are  still  discussing about  transformations. Example  2.5  is  a  particular  case where  Pita  one  is  90  degree, Deta  two  is  negative. 90  degree,  theta  three  is  90  degree. After  you  have  dived  this  general  matrix, you  just  substitute  into  it, and  it  can  be  simplified  into  one  form. By  multiplying  all  this  three  together  first, you  can  dive  a  single  transformation  matrix, so  that  subsequently  you  need  not  multiply anymore  because  there  are  two  ways. One  way  is  that you  always  find  what  is  r  one, r2r3  with  a  particular  angles and  then  start  multiplying  them. But  each  time  you calculate  for  one  orientations, you  need  to  multiply  the  matrices. This  is  not  effective. Usually  in  kinematics,  we  will multiply  them  manually  first, and  then  use  it  to  calculate  for  any  angles, such  as  example  2.5, given  a  particular  angle, I  can  calculate  the rotational  transformation. Now,  a  last  example before  I  take  a  short  break, because  it's  a  three  hour  lectures. So  suppose  that  now  you  have a  coordinate  with  respect to  the  mobile  frame  000.6. This  actually  means  this.  Suppose  that you're  at  the  mobile  coordinate. You  look  at  any  factor  position. Assuming  that  this  length  is  0.6. Then  these  positions  of  Nu  factors, if  you  are  sitting  in  the  mobile  frame  is always  one  equal  to  zero, two  equal  to  zero,  M  three equal  to  0.6.  Right? So  this  explain  this  coordinates,  000.6. If  you  are  sitting  in  this  mobile  frame, you'll  always  see  0.6,  right? Like  you  are  inside  the  car. No  matter  how  the  car  move, you  always  see  a  fixed coordinate  respect  to  you. But  someone  outside  this  mobile  frame That  means  the  fixed  frame. After  this  sequence  of  rotations, with  dt  one  equal  to  Pi  over  two, D  two  equal  to  negative  pi  over  two, dt  three  is  also  Pi  over  two. You  want  to  predict  the positions  of  the  factor, position  of  any  factor. This  means  you  multiply  this  matrix  by  000.6. This  is  the  mobile  frame, and  that  gives  you  the  coin respect  to  the  fixed  frame, the  word  frame,  which  is  not  moving  together. If  you  simply  multiply  them, you'll  see  that  it's  0.600. What  this  means  is  that after  this  sequence  of  rotation, actually,  your  end  factor  will be  at  this  position. Where  F  one  is  equal  to  0.6. F  two,  zero,  F  three  is  also  equal  to  zero. We  can  use  this  mathematically  to predict  the  positions  of  the  e  factors. Where  is  it  pointing  towards? Is  now  pointing  in  this  direction of  0.600  respect  to  the  world  frame. Fixed  frame.  But  if  you are  sitting  together  inside  the  mobile  frame, you'll  always  see  0.6,  it's  moving  together. Let's  take  a  short  break. Otherwise,  you  will  be too  tiring  for  3  hours  so. We  will  take  a  15  minutes  break. Let's  come  back  at  8:10. If  you  have  any  questions  during  this  period, you  can  also  come  down  to  discuss. I'll  see  you  later. Assignment  reassignment.  I  have  no  idea. You  have  to  check  with the  assignment  of  the  second  part. In  case  some  of  you  came  late, I  noted  that  I  have announced  at  the  beginning of  the  lectures  about  the  assessment. My  assessment  is  only  the  first  part. For  the  second  part, it  will  be  announced  later by  Professor  Hugo  Tang. Suppose  that  you  need  to  know in  advance  for  some  planning  purpose, you  need  to  contact  him  personally  by  e  mail. My  part,  it  will  be just  week  seven  Week  seven. And  after  this  class, at  the  end  of  this  week, I  will  make  an  announcement and  after  the  ad  drop  period, I  will  announce  another  time  in case  some  newcomers  join. So  this  is  usually  what  we  will  do. As  for  the  second  part, it  will  be  fixed  by  another  professors, that  part  will  be  announced  later. And  also  some  ask  about  programming, as  I  said,  I  will  also  announce  it  later  on. Is  optional  is  up to  you  if  you  want  to  learn, you  can  sign  on  because robots  programming  actually, it  will  depends  on  which  company,  right? They  are  slightly  different. So  I  for  this  course, we  are  focusing  on  the  basic  of robotics  kinematics,  mobile  robot,  sensing. For  programming,  there  are  other courses  which  you  can  join. Mainly  from  the  mechanical  engineering, right? So  you  can  check  with  the  office  or  all  this. Let  us  continue  on  the  lectures. We  have  learned  about  three fundamental  rotation  transformations. However,  for  mobile  coordinates, as  you  can  see  from  this  diagram  over  here, no  need  that  there's  rotation. There's  also  a  translation. Which  means  that  this  coordinates will  be  translated. There's  some  displacement  in the  three  dimensional  space in  addition  to  rotation. This  basically  means  that  we  need  to  derive a  transformation  matrix  that  can account  for  both  rotation  and  translation. Remember  that  rotation  transformations are  three  times  three,  right? Three  times  three  metrics, and  we  have  derived  three  of  them, r  one,  r  two,  and  r  three. He  suppose  that  you put  another  transformation, which  is  a  translation  x  y z.  Into  one  matrix. In  this  case,  you  can  see that  this  lead  to  a  three  times  four  matrix. I  say  again  if  you  put the  rotation,  say  rr2r3, which  is  three  times  three, together  with  the  translation, which  is  a  vector  three  times  one. This  lead  to  three  matrix, which  is  not  a  square  matrix. Now,  this  has  a  problem. Suppose  that  you  define a  transformation  matrix  t, which  is  a  three  times  more  matrix. Then  you  cannot  find the  inverse  transformation  easily,  right? It's  not  a  square  matrix. You  also  cannot  multiply  them  according  to the  composite  rules  to  get the  composite  transformation  matrix,  right? That  means  the  overall  transformation  matrix. So  in  order  to perform  multiplications  as  well as  finding  the  square  inverse, we  need  to  convert  this  into  a  square  matrix. One  very  simple  idea  is  that  you add  the  last  row  of  the  identity  matrix. Why  Id  matrix  because  it  means  no  change. Suppose  that  you  add  0001  in  the  last  row. This  will  basically  lead  you  to a  square  matrix  four  times  fall  now. Which  will  include  rotations  and translation  together.  This  rotation. This  will  be  translations represented  in  a  single  matrix. I'm  trying  to  explain  what is  written  over  here. As  you  can  see,  here, we'll  put  the  rotations, which  is  typically a  three  times  three  matrix. Then  we  add  the  translations  X  Y  Z, and  we  append  it  with  redundant  information. 0001. This  basically  form a  homogeneous  transformation  matrix,  right? The  purpose  is  to include  both  rotation  and  translations. At  the  same  time,  we  need  a  square  matrix. So  three  times  three  matrix represent the  orientations  of  the  mobile  frame where  the  three  times  one  vector represent  the  translation  vectors,  right? It's  actually  the  positions  of the  vector  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. For  the  homogeneous  coordinate, we  will  append  a  redundant  information. Be  usually  in  the  three  dimensional  space, you  have  only  x  y, z,  which  is  r  three. However,  your  transformation  matrix now  is  four  times  four. Four  times  four  matrix  cannot multiply  with  three  times  one  vector. Similarly,  one  very  easy  way  out  is that  just  add  in  a  redundant  information  one. This  three  is  called  the  physical  coordinate, while  one  is  just  a  redundant  information to  enable  matrix  multiplication  with  vectors. This  coordinates  with  appended one  is  called  the  homogeneous  coordinates. The  physical  coordinates  will still  be  the  first  three. By  doing  so,  we  will  be  able  to multiply  this  with your  homogeneous  coordinates, with  this  redundant  information to  perform  matrix  multiplication. With  this,  we  are  now  ready  to define  the  fundamental  rotations, as  well  as  the  fundamental  translations in  the  homogeneous  codinate, and  we  call  them  fundamental homogeneous  rotation and  translation  matrixes. Let  us  look  at the  fundamental  homogeneous  translation. By  fundamental  translation, it  means  only  translation. By  only  translation,  it  means  no  rotation. No  rotation,  only  translation, no  rotation  means  what  r is  equal  to  d  matrix. We  replace  error  by  the  ted  matrix  means no  rotation  and  as  for  the  translations. We'll  just  put  everything  together. X  y,  z. You  need  not  come  up  one  for  x  one, one  for  z  separately because  you  can  account  for  all  three, using  one  vector,  which  is  x  y, z,  P  one,  P  two,  and  P  three. This  basically  means  that  we  have derived  a  fundamental  translation  matrix. When  you  multiply  a  vectors  in a  mobile  frame  by  this  translation  matrix. For  example,  you  can  try,  say, Q  three  with  a  redundant  informations Using  this,  you  can  see  that this  is  shifted  translated. And  the  last  one  will  always  give  you  one. In  addition  to  translation, we  also  will  have  rotations. Before  that,  let  us  look  at  one  example on  the  trans  example,  2.6. Suppose  that  you  have  a  mobile  frame, which  is  now  translated five  units  along  F  one. Negative  three  units  along  F  two, that  means  move  in the  reverse  directions  of  F  two. Then  the  homogeneous transformation  matrix  is  simply, putting  the  first  one  a  five. Second  one  is  negative  three, and  there's  no  mentions  of  the  third  one means  no  translation  along  the  third  axis. If  there's  no  translation, it  means  that  you  put  zero. This  is  a  homogeneous  translation  matrix in  a  four  times  four  representation, homogeneous  conate  is  one. Using  this,  we  can  multiply these  transformations  by  this  coordinate. The  fiscal  coordinate  is  the  first  three. This  is  a  redundant  information to  enable  matrix  multiplication. From  here,  you  can  see  that  we  can now  perform  matrix  multiplication. M  four  times  so matrix  multiply  by a  vectors,  which  is  four  times  one. You  still  give  you  a  four  times  one  vectors. But  to  retrieve  the  information, you  only  look  at  the  first  three,  right? In  the  last  one.  And  that give  you  the  physical  coordinates,  right? Which  is  five,  negative  three, and  ten,  five  negative  three  and  ten. This  basically  means  that  after this  is  translated,  right? Zero  is  translated  by five  units,  so  it  become  five. Okay.  Zero  is  translated by  negative  three  units, so  it  become  negative  three, and  ten,  right?  There's  no  translation. So  you  remain  at  ten,  no  translation, not  moving.  So  remain  at  ten. Okay.  So  everything  can  be  predicted and  mathematically  by  all  these  equation so  that  you  can  code  it  in the  program  as  well, based  on  all  these  metric vectors  multiplication. Just  now,  some  students  asked me  about  what  is  the  requirement? Actually  all  these  undergraduate metric  multiplications,  you  have  to  know. If  not,  nowadays  quite  easy, just  search  for  videos, review  of  metric  multiplications, re  and  you  will  lead  you  to some  basic  videos  which can  do  a  quick  revision. B  this  is  postgraduate  cost. We  have  to  quickly move  on  to  the  postgraduate  level. Inverse  translations, suppose  that  you  are given  the  other  way  around, given  fixed  coordinate, find  the  mobile  coordinate. Then  you  need  to find  the  inverse  transformation. Same  thing  for  inverse  transformations, it  means  what  a  matrix, a  matrix,  multiply  by is  inverse  you  give  you  the  identity  matrix, basic  definitions  of  inverse  matrix. From  a  transformation  matrix  point  of  view, it  means  that  if  you  have translated  by  a  three  dimensional  space, X  z,  and  you want  to  go  back  to  the  original  form. How  do  you  go  back? You  just  translate  backwards, so  it's  negative  vectors. If  I  move  by a  certain  distance,  in  this  direction, or  you  move  back,  you  just reverse  and  move  back to  the  original  directions. This  is  intuitive  quite easy,  for  you  to  remember. How  do  you  remember  that inverse  of  a  fundamental  translation  matrix is  to  replace  the  original  matrix  by  negative P.  We  look  at this  basic  definitions  of  inverse. T  multiplied  by  t  inverse  is  equal  to  r, and  here  it  means  transformation. With  this,  you  can  easily  take the  inverse  of  this  matrix if  you  want,  by  for  example, put  this  negative  five, this  is  positive  five  and  you  can  try, multiply  them  together  to  get  an  dit  matrix. You  can  see  at  it  means. You  move  by  five,  you  move  back  by  five. You  move  backward  by  three, you  move  forward  by  three,  then  you  come back  to  the  original  position. We  have  seen  how  to  define a  fundamental  translation  transformation in  the  homogeneous  coordinate. Next,  let  us  move  on  to fundamental  rotation in  the  homogeneous  coordinates. We  call  fundamental  homogeneous  rotation. Now,  by  fundamental  rotation, It  means  only  rotation. By  only  rotation,  it  means  no  translation. Therefore,  it's  actually a  very  simple  representations of  our  fundamental  rotational  matrixes. R  1r2r3,  remember, by  adding  a  vector of  zero  on  the  right  hand  side, append  it  with  a  redundant  information of  ID  matrix  of  the  last. This  means  that  I'm  only  performing  rotation. I  do  not  want  to  perform  translation. One  example,  suppose  that  you  have  vectors, Q  m  given  in  the  mobile  coordinate 0010  is  the  physical  coordinate. One,  remember  is  to  add a  redundant  information  to convert  it  into  homogeneous  codinate. I  suppose  that  this  mobile  frame, which  is  initially  coincide  with  F, is  now  rotated  by  45  degrees, about  the  first  axis  of  the  fixed  frame. This  results  in  the  homogeneous transformation  matrix  in  this  form. Firstly,  no  translation. Only  rotation  about the  first  axis  of  the  fixed  frame, the  mean  F  one,  by  angle  Pi  over  two. We're  going  to  retrieve  the  R  one, and  then  zero  translations, appended  with  redundant  information, last  row  of  the  Dy  matrix, to  make  it  a  fundamental rotational  transformation. That  means  that  given this  rotational  transformation, to  interpret  it,  you  always divide  in  this  way. This  will  be  a  rotation. This  will  be  translation, and  this  is  redundant  information  just to  convert  this  transformation matrix  into  a  form, which  is  feasible  for  matrix  multiplication and  finding  the  inverse  transformation easily  using  square  inverse. Then  you  subsite  Pi  over  four into  the  general  transformation  matrix. You  can  show  that  it  reduces  to a  particular  transformation  matrix, which  is  showing  the  last  row  over  here. Then  using  this  matrix, you  can  multiply  by  any  coordinates  in the  mobile  frame  to convert  it  into  a  coordinate in  the  fixed  frame. Given  any  coordinates  in  the  mobile  frame, such  as  00,  All  right. You  can  convert  it  into a  physical  coordinates  in  the  mobile  frame, and  it  is  equal  to  zero, negative  7.07,  positive  707 after  you  perform  matrix  multiplication. So  the  requirements  actually  here  is matrix  multiplications  and  multiplications of  matrix  with  a  vector, which  you  should  review  if  you  have not  have  forgotten  about  them. Next,  what  is  the  inverse  rotational  matrix in  the  homogeneous  transformation? It's  actually  the  same.  Hey. Remember,  I  show  it  to  you  just  now. Suppose  that  you  want  to  rotate  backward. You  put  negative  angle. If  you  rotate  forward  by  five, you  want  to  go  back  to  the  original  position. You  rotate  backward,  Methematically, because  of  the  properties of  this  transformation  matrix, they  are  all  sine  cosine,  zeros,  and  one. It  can  be  shown  that  you  always reduces  to  the  transpose  of  the  matrix. Two  ways  of  calculating the  inverse  of  your  rotational  matrix. One,  just  substitute  negative  five into  the  original  matrix. Second  way,  just  take the  transpose  of  the  original  matrix. Both  will  give  you  the  inverse  matrix. L  et  me  do  a  quick  review of  what  we  have  learned  so  far. But  even  though  we  have  gone through  quite  a  lot  of  things, it  seems  quite  extensive, but  it  can  be  summarized  into just  one  slide.  This  is  a  summary. We  have  learned  three  fundamental  rotations, rotation  about  first  axis, second  axis,  and  the  third  axis, and  we  put  it  into a  homogeneous  transformation homogeneous  coordinate. So  that  we  can perform  matrix  multiplication,  right? Firstly,  this  p  rotational  matrix has  this  property  that  R  one, for  instance,  it  will be  equal  to  the  first  row  first  column of  the  identity  matrix. Actually,  even  though you  need  not  memorize  this, it  can  be  quite  easily  identified by  just  transferring  first  row  first  column of  the  identity  matrix  here. Why  is  it  so?  Because  it's rotating  about  the  first  axis? If  you  rotate  about  that  axis, the  axis  does  not  change. The  other  two  axis  will  change. Therefore,  it's  first  row  first  of the  identity  identity  matric  means  no  change. Whatever  Vector, multiplied  by  dy  matrix, you'll  remain  the  same. Wever  matrix,  multiplied  by dit  matrix,  you'll  remain  the  same. It  means  no  transformation. Right? He  next  the  remaining  elements  of  R  one, one  very  special  property  is that  your  diagonal  terms will  always  be  equal  to  sine. O  diagonal  term  will  always  be  sine. But  the  diagonal  terms, it  can  be  positive  or  negative. How  do  we  identify  it? Negative  one  to  the  power  of  k. If  k  is  equal  to  one, is  negative  one  to the  part  of  one  is  negative. The  diagonal  term  will  be  negative  for  r  one. As  for  the  rest, If  there's  no  translation, fundamental  rotation  means  rotation  only, O  rotation.  We  put  000. Lastly,  In  order  to  make  it  a  square  matrix, you  put  0001,  which  is a  last  row  of  a  four  times  four  IDA  matrix. By  doing  so,  we  can represent  both  rotation  and  translation, but  in  this  case,  no  translation,  O  rotation. Now,  similarly,  r2r,  you  can  see  that, you  get  you  get  a  second, second  column  of  the  ID  matrix. You  divide  it  into  this  form, put  r  two  here. R  three,  third  row,  third  column. Again,  it  means  what  is not  rotating  respect  to. That  is  not  rotating. That  axis  are  not  rotating  because  it's rotating  respect  to  these  two  axis. That  means  they  will  remain  the  same. And  of  diagonal  terms, as  you  can  see,  sorry, the  diagonal  terms,  as  you can  see,  is  always  cosine. Always  cosine  deter. First,  you  fill  out  the  identity  matrix. R  1r2r3,  first,  second,  third. Then  you  fill  out  the  diagonal terms,  all  co  sign. Then  fill  out  the  diagonal  terms  all  sign. Fill  up  them  first,  all  sign. Negative  one  to  the  f  of  k  is  k  equal  to  one, is  k  equal  to  two,  is  k  equal  to  three. It  means  what  even  oh, O  you  give  negative. Even,  you  give  you  positive. And  it  gives  you  negative. In  fact,  you  don't  need  to  multiply. You  just  check  whether  it's  or  even. Then  you  put  positive  or  negative. Once  you  identify  the  one on  top  of  the  diagonal  elements, the  other  one  is  always  the  reverse. If  this  is  negative, the  other  one  is  positive. If  this  is  positive, the  other  one  is  negative. If  this  is  negative, the  other  one  is  positive. This  is  just  some  characteristics of  the  matrix, which  will  help  you  to  identify  them. For  example,  after  two  days, if  you  understand  the  concept, even  if  I  don't  write  this, Stay,  you  understand. What  is  the  meaning  because  it's  not rotating  with  respect  to that  axis  first  axis. Therefore,  this  is  R? With  respect  to  R.  And  so  on  and  so  forth, with  respect  to  R  two  and  R  three. Not  to  worry  too  much  about  that. Even  though  I  go  through  this  with  you, you  are  not  expected  to  memorize  this. You're  not  expected  to  memorize  this, but  it's  useful  for  you  to identify  them  if  you  need  to  use  them. Give  Straightaway,  you  can  understand what  is  the  meaning  of  the  transformation. Lastly,  a  fundamental  translation  does  not consist  of  three  matrixes because  you  can  represent  it. A  three  into  one  vector. P  one,  P  two  and  P  three. Which  means  altogether  there  are only  four  fundamental  transformation  matrix, which  is  defined  in  the  homogeneous  codinate. Be  for  translations  means  no  rotation. No  rotations  then  we  put  ID  matric. The  other  way  to  look  at  it  is  that  you put  all  the  five  equal  to  zero. Right? If  you  put  all  the  five  equal  to  zero, you  can  see  that  all  reduces  to identity  metrics  because  there's  no  rotation. T  equal  to  zero  means  no  rotation. Together  four  and  if you  multiply  them  together, it  can  give  you  any  rotation, any  translation,  any  rotations and  any  translation. Therefore,  these  are  the fundamental  homogeneous transformation  matrixes. Using  them,  we  can identify  composite one  single  transformation  matrix, which  is  used  to  represent  a  sequence or  rotation  and  translation. I  follow  this  law  as  well, suppose  that  you  have a  fixed  frame  and the  mobile  frame  which are  initially  coincide, no  translation,  no  rotation. Then  obviously  it's  equal  to  dy  matric. Dy  matric  means  no  transformation,  no  change. Now,  suppose  that  your  mobile  frame  is translated  or  rotated,  now's  more  general. Just  now  we  talk  about  rotation  only. Now  it  can  be  either  translation  or  rotation. If  you  have  a  rotation  of transflation  respect  to  the  fixed  frame, then  you  pre  multiply. But  however,  if  you  have a  transformations  with  respect to  the  mobile  frame, then  you  post  multiply. The  rule  is  still  the  same, except  that  now  you're  dealing with  these  four  matrixes. Just  now  we're  dealing with  three  times  three  matrix. Now  we're  dealing  with  four  times  matrix. Because  we  have  put  them into  homogeneous  coordinate, we  can  multiply  them. We  can  multiply  them.  That  means we  imagine  that  you  do  not  have  this Even  though  you  have rotation  and  translations, you  cannot  multiply  them together  to  form  a  composite  matrix. That's  the  purpose  of  the  homogeneous  cod. It's  just  to  enable you  to  perform  matrix  multiplication, and  then  as  a  result,  you  can  program. I  will  use  two  examples to  show  you this  composite  transformation  matrix. In  example  2.7,  we  have  two  frames, mobile  frame,  and  fixed  frame initially  coincide. Suppose  that  we  translate the  mobile  frame  along the  F  two  by  three  units.  This  translation. Followed  by  a  rotation  about F  three  by  180  degrees. After  these  two  transformations, want  to  find  the  locations of  the  mobile  frames, 10,  zero,  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. Respect  to  the  fixed.  That  means that  if  someone  moving together  with  the  mobile  frame and  is  looking  at  the  first  axis, it's  always  fixed  100. But  someone  outside  this  mobile  frame Looking  at  this  M  one  after this  sequence  of  translation  and  rotations, we'll  have  different  coordinates. I  always  use  the  example  of  the  car. Someone  inside  the  car,  looking at  a  fixed  phase, it's  always  fixed  no matter  how  you  rotate  the  car, right,  how  you  turn  it,  how  you  translate  it. But  someone  outside  the  car, looking  at  the  same  position, with  respect  to  you will  be  a  different  location. We  want  to  der  it  metabatically. So  firstly,  if  they  are initially  coincide,  you  start  with. And  if  it's  respect  to fixed  frame,  pre  multiplier. First  one  is  a  translation. We  pre  multiply  by a  translation  transformation  matrix. Second  one  is  rotation  respect to  the  fixed  frame  as  well. Therefore,  we  also  pre  multiply. Pre  multiply  is  actually  easier to  understand  because imagine  you  have  a  coordinate. Mob. You  translate  first.  All  these are  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. You  translate  first,  then  you rotate  so  you  operate  translation  first, followed  by  a  rotation. But  remember,  this  is  with  respect  to the  fixed  spring,  fixed  spring. By  this,  we  can  derive  the  details, translations  about  the  third  axis, translation  about  the  second  axis of  the  fixed  bran  by  three  units. This  is  what  it  means.  Translation  about the  second  axis  of the  fixed  bran  by  three  units. What  about  first  and  third,  no  translation. We  divide  this  metric  into  this  form. That  is  easier  to  interpret. The  vector  on  the  right  means what  translate  along  x,  zero, translate  along  y,  which  is  F  two,  three, translate  along  z,  which  is  F  three, zero  Only  translate  along  F  three. This  is  specified  here. O  and  then  there's  no  rotation. If  there's  no  rotation,  you  put  dy  matric. This  form  a  fundamental  translation matrix  T  units  along  F  two. Okay,  next,  we  have  a  rotation  about  F  three. You  divide  this  into  this  form, and  rotation  means  no  translation. Next  because  it's  respect  to  F  three. Third  rot  columns  will be  ideally  matrix,  no  change. Follow  by  cosine  P. Diagonal  term  cosine  part. Press  calculator,  give  you  negative  one  off diagonal  term  sine hundred  80  degree,  always  zero. In  fact,  here,  we  don't even  need  to  know  the  sig because  zero  has  no  sig. I  give  you  this  matrix  in  this  form. Because  both  are  4.4,  4.4, you  can  then  multiply  them together  to  get  this  composite. This  composite  matrix  represent a  sequence  of  transformation. In  this  case,  translate then  rotate  with  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. This  is  what  we  get. Now,  I'll  show  it  to  you  graphically. Graphically,  what  does  it  mean? By  the  way,  after  you  have found  this  composite  matrix, that  means  the  overall  matrix representing  two  transformation. Then  you  can  use  it  to  find the  locations  of  your  M  one, M  one  means  100, to  put  it  into  a  fixed  fringe. Fixed  fringe.  It  means  that  if  someone  is outside,  At  this  fixed  frame. Looking  at  M  one, after  a  sequence  of  transformation, what  will  be  the  location? And  you  must  also  imagine  that  if  you are  moving  together  with  the  mobile  frame, Always  sitting  at  that  frame  inside  the  car, when  you  look  at  M  one, it's  always  100,  right? No  change.  Always  one  z  zero. But  someone  outside,  right  will  be  different. So  I'll  show  you  the  graphical  illustrations. Imagine  that  you  have  two  frames which  initially  coincide. Coincide  means  what  idly  matric. No  change.  They  are  the  same. Suppose  that  you  translate the  mobile  frame  by  three  units  along  F  two. Firstly,  you  must  identify  waves  F  two  here. It  means  what  your  mobile  frame  will move  by  three  units. Assuming  that  the  is  three  units, you  will  move  to  your  right  hand  side. Yeah,  by  three  units. After  that,  he  will  perform a  rotation  about  F  three. By  180  degree. Now,  be  careful.  F  three  is  here. M  t  is  at  the  other  side. F  t  is  here,  t  is  the  other  side. F  three  is  here. It  means  that  you  have  to  rotate,  right? We  respect  to  F  three  by  180  degree. 180  degree  means  flip  to  the  other  side. Right?  Flip  to  the  other  side. Is  something  like  that, standing  at  a  certain  location, you  stretch  out  your  arm,  right? Then  you  rotate  respect  to  your  body. The  other  way  round, 180  degree  means,  the  other  way  around. You  will  fit  to  the  other  side  of the  coordinate,  with  respect  to  F  two. This  is  a  graphic  illustrations of  this  sequence  of  transformation. Translate  first,  rotate  180  degree. Then  he  can  come  to  this  location. Now,  rather  than  finding  this  graphically, we  can  do  it  mathematically  by this  composite  matrix  B by  multiplying  this  matrix by  this  physical  location, we  can  actually  know  the  locations  of  M  one, respect  to  the  fixed  frame. In  fact,  we're  trying  to  find  these  vectors. From  the  origin  of the  fixed  frame  to the  tip  of  the  vector,  M  one. Now,  the  calculations  give  us  negative  one, negative  three,  and  zero. This  is  a  physical  coordinates the  redundant  information. Physically,  it  means  that F  one,  respect  to  F  one, F  one  is  I  is  negative  with  respect  to  F  one. What  this  means  is  that  because this  is  the  other  way  round, and  this  is  a  unit  vector. Remember  that  the  are  the  basic  vectors. They  are  all  unit  vectors. So  it  is  actually  located at  negative  one,  the  other  side. Right  with  respect  to  F  one. Therefore,  you  see  this  as  F  one. And  remember  just  now, it  was  translated  by  three, and  then  it  rotated. So  when  you  flick  to  the  other  side, you  become  negative  F  three. Sorry,  negative  three.  Respect  to  F  two. Be  it  flick  to  the  other  side, this  is  positive  three. F  to  the  other  side  become  negative  three. And  you  can  see  that  is  exactly  this. Because  M  one  is  on  this  plane,  right? There's  no  translation  upward. So  therefore  is  equal  to  zero. Therefore,  our  metametical  predictions  is exactly  the  same  as  our  graphical  sketch. This  show  the  sequence of  rotations  and  translation. Now,  let  me  do  a  I  respect  to  mobile  frame. Just  now  I  do  it  respect  to  fixed  frame. Mm.  This  example  is  fixed  frame. You  translate  along F  two  fixed  frame  by  three  units, then  you  rotate  about  F  three, 580  degree,  also  fixed  frame. Now  we  do  it  this  way. We  rotate.  About  M  two  by  three  units. Sorry,  we  translate  translate  along  M  two. Just  now  we  translate  along F  two  by  three  units. Now  you  replace  f  two  by  M  two. Previous  examples,  we  rotate about  F  three  by  180  degree. Now  we  translate. Now  we  rotate  about  M  three, replace  F  three  by  M  three. The  angle  remain  the  same. He  in  this  case, is  respect  to  mobile  frame. Mobile  mobile. Let's  look  at  the  composite  algorithm  first. Before  we  look  at  it  graphically, first,  you  have  an  anald  matrix, because  the  first  operation is  respect  to  the  mobile  frame, so  you  post  multiplier.  Translation  matrix. Then  you  post  multiply  because it's  also  respect  to  the  mobile  frame. And  therefore, because metrics  multiplication  do  not  commute. Now  we  actually  reverse  the  operation. Okay. I  give  you  a  slightly different  transformation. If  you  compare  the  two,  there will  be  a  slight  difference. This  was  negative.  Now  it  become  positive. And  similarly,  we'd  like to  find  out  the  locations  of  n  one. Respect  to  the  fixed  frame after  the  two  transformation. But  now  is  respect  to  the  mobile  frame. Let's  look  at  at  graphically. Imagine  that  these  two  frames are  initially  coincide. This  one,  right?  I  did  it  matrix. And  now  you  will  first translate  respect  to  the  mobile  frame. The  first  one  actually  no  difference because  initially  go  inside. So  whether  you  translate mobile  or  fix  is  still  the  same. The  first  one  looks  the  same. Now,  the  key  point  is  the  second  one. You're  now  rotating  about the  mobile  frame  three. It's  here. The  previous  one  was  rotating  about  F  three, that  means  you  fix  it  180  degree  here. Now  you're  rotating  about  M  three, which  is  here,  correct? And  if  you  rotate  about this  axis  by  180  degree, notice  that  this  is  mobile  frame, not  the  fixed  frame,  right? So  there's  a  difference  now,  and  this  caused it  to  be  rotated  180  degree. By  180  degree  means  M  two  point  backward. M  one  point  backward.  How  about  M  three? No  change,  right? No  change.  This  explain  why there's  a  third  row  column become  the  Dy  matrix. Because  this  one  has  no  change. Only  the  other  two  will  change. Okay.  If  I  show  it  to  you  graphically, I  flip  it,  correct? Flip  it  180  degree. Now,  it  is  different  from  the  first  one now  because  it  is  on  the  right  hand  side. The  other  one  was  on  the  left hand  side  over  here. If  you  compare  the  two  examples,  correct? Now,  using  this  matrix, I  can  also  interpret  it  the  other  way  around. Now  suppose  that  you  have two  frames  initially  coincide. And  suppose  that  you  first  rotate  it  first, respect  to  the  third  axis, rotate  it  first,  respect  to  the  third  axis. This  actually  represent  this  one. In  terms  of  the  mobile  coordinate is  that  you  rotate  it  first. Rotate  it  first,  then  you  translate. You'll  end  up  in  exactly  this  position. So  it's  actually  the  reverse transformation  over  here. If  you  rotate  first, then  translate  right  with respect  to  the  fixed  frame,  be  careful. Right  now,  you're  interpreting  it, respect  to  the  fixed  frame as  the  reverse  operations, then  you  get  the  same  transformation. So  I  say  again. The  first  one  is  respect  to  mobile  frame. You  translate  first,  respect  to  M  two, Then  you  rotate  respect  to  M  three. You  get  this  location,  right? This  is  interpretation  from  the  mobile  frame. The  other  way  to  look  at  it  is that  you  rotate  first, respect  to  M  three, respect  to  the  fixed  spring. Because  M  three  is  F  two. Now,  you  rotate  respect  to  two, then  you  translate  log  F  two. You  first  rotate,  then  translate. You  also  get  to  the  same  position. But  now  it's  respect  to  the  fixed  plan. In  other  words,  you  just  remember  this if  it's  respect  to fixed  pin  you  pre  multiply. If  you  respect  to  the  mobile  phe  you multiply  because  it's inverse  operation  naturally. Lastly,  if  a  person sitting  together  with  a  mobile  frame, looking  at  these  positions  is always  always  one,  zero,  zero. To  put  it  into  homogenous  coordinates, we  have  pon  redundant  information  one. This  basically  means  that you  can  actually  multiply  this. With  this. Then  you  can  get  the  physical  coordinate with  respect  to  the  fixed  rate. Now,  lastly,  sometimes. If  you  need  to  calculate the  inverse  off the  homogeneous  transformation  matrix, that  means the  inverse homogeneous  transformation  matrix. This  is  what  you  need  to  do. Firstly,  rotation  is  easy to  understand  transpose  transpose. Translations  is  negative  P, but  this  involve  both  rotation  and translations  together. Therefore,  you  have  RT  as  well. RT  as  well,  that  means  that negative  P  is  in  the  mobile  coordinates. Then  you  have  RT  is  to invert  invert  it  back to  the  original  position. In  fact,  one  way  to  check  it  is that  you  multiply  by  the  original  matrix. And  due  to  the  fact  that Rt  R  is  equal  to  identity  matrix, this  will  be  equal  to a  four  times  small  identity  matrix. This  is  how  we  find the  inverse  transformation  metric in  the  homogeneous  coordinate. Let  us  look  at  one  example. In  this  example,  we are  looking  at  the  reverse. We  have  a  mobile  frame  and  a  fixed. And  suppose  that  we have  this  transformation  matrix, which  map  mobile  frame  into  the  fixed  spring. This  is  mobile  frame, respect  to  the  fixed  bring. Find  the  homogeneous coordinate  transformations, which  do  the  other  way  around. Mt  F  into  Mm. That  means  basically  it's  just  asking  you  to find  the  inverse  matrix  given  the  matrix, find  the  inverse  matrix,  given T  find  T  inverse. And  then  use  it  to  find the  location  of  the  F  two  respect to  the  mobile  fringe. Because  the  first  one  give  you the  location  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. The  inverse  give  you  the  location  respect to  the  mobile  frame. And  to  find  the  inverse  of  this  matrix, remember  that  you  need  not calculate  the determinant  and  the  join  matrix. He  just  do  this. He  divide  the  original  matrix  into  this  form. This  will  be  your  rotational  transformation. Take  the  transpose. Transpose  means  row  become column,  column  become  row. Then  after  that,  reverse  the  sine  of P.  Multiply by  R  t.  Multiply  by  R  t, and  that  actually  give you  this  vector  over  here. That  will  be  the  inverse  matrix. There's  a  very  fast  way  of  caling  it. If  you  try  to  multiply  this two  together,  you  see  that  you  need  this. Lastly,  given  vectors  in  the  fixed  spring, 010f2,  F  two  means that  it  is  a  basic  vectors along  the  second  axis,  so  is  010. Append  it  with  a  redundant  information so  that  you  can  multiply  with  f  matrix. After  multiplying  it,  ignore this  redundant  informations  to retrieve  the  physical  coordinates. I  basically  means  that  if you  are  interested  in  the  location  of  F  two, with  respect  to  M  one, that  will  be  the  physical  coordinates. M  one  is  negative  one, M  two  is  zero, M  three  is  negative  two. Graphically,  this  is  how  it  looks  like. If  you  M  two,  the  other  way  around. Previously,  we  always  looking from  the  perspective  of  the  fixed  brain. Now  it  is  the  other  way  around. Is  someone  inside  the  mobile  frame. Looking  at  the  fixed  brain. In  particular,  the  tip of  F  two  of  the  fixed  frame, what  will  be  the  coordinate? From  here,  you  can actually  see  that  this  is  M  one. And  you  look  at  this  because  this is  unit  vector  has  a  length  of  one. And  because  there's a  physical  translations  of  two, therefore,  this  is  actually  negative  one. Graphically,  this  is  given  to  you. Graphically.  That  means  you  just  look  back. This  will  be  this  location. Negative  one  because  it's in  the  other  directions  of  M  one. And  then  M  two  and  M  three, M  two  is  equal to  zero  because  it's  on  this  white  screen. No  translation  along  M  two. Everything  is  on  the  white  screen. Both  coordinate. Lastly,  M  three  is equal  to  negative  two  because  M  three  is, but  this  is  downward  by  two. Therefore  it  is  equal  to  negative  two. This  is  just  to  check  it  graphically and  this  graph  is  given. We  derive  this  mathematics,  right? Based  on  multiplications  of metric  by  a  vectors. And  then  we  check  against this  graph  to  see whether  is  it  consistent  or  not. In  fact,  we  can  get  the  locations  of our  F  two  respect  to  the  mobile  frame. Someone  sitting  here,  looking  at  this  F  two, and  he  will  see this  position,  respect  to  here. Today's  lectures  is  actually  to review  some  of  the  matrics  basic  mathematics, in  particular,  coordinate  transformation in  metric  from  that  were required  to  model  the  kinematics of  a  robot  systems. So  next  week,  then  we'll  start the  actual  topics  on  kinematics. Meaning  that  how  do  we  make  use  of all  these  transformation  matrices? In  fact,  here  you  can  see  that there's  a  fixed  coordinate, there's  a  mobile  coordinate, and  there  are  multiple  joints. Okay.  Which  means  that  there  are multiple  coordinates. When  each  joint  move, each  joint  move,  the  mobile  frame will  move  with  respect  to the  previous  coordinate. So  there's  a  sequence of  transformations  between  them. Until  we  reach  the  final  end  effector  frame, We'll  make  use  of the  concept  that  we  have  learned, what  the  transformation matrixes  in  homogenous  coordinates, as  well  as  the  composite  rules  to  derive a  transformation  matrix  for the  manipulator  as  the  functions of  the  joint  variables. So  that  given  the  joint  angles, given  d1d2  dd4df  d  six, we  can  derive  a  model  to  calculate the  position  and  orientation  of  the  factor, that  means  the  mobile  frame  attached  to the  factor  with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame, which  is  basically  your  base. Sometimes  we  call  this  two frame,  a  mobile  frame. Respect  to  the  base  string, which  is  the  fixed  string. All  the  robots  commands  are issue  respect  to  the  fixed  ram. Where  is  your  position, which  is  the  translation, with  respect  to  the  fixed  ram? How  your  factor  is  oriented  rotation, respect  to  the  fixed  ring, which  we'll  discuss  in  the  next  lectures. I've  gone  through  quite  a  lot  of  materials. So  we'll  stop  here  today. In  every  week,  pries  review  today's  lectures. E  will  be  recorded  as  well. So  you  can  watch  through the  videos  again  to  review  it. Before  you  come  for  the  next  e. Every  week,  if  you  do  the  same, right,  you'll  be  all  right. And  if  you  have  any  questions you  can  always  discuss  with  me. Okay.  I'll  stop  here  today. Thank  you.  Thank  you.
