Good  evening,  class. So  we  will  start  the  lectures. Last  week,  basically,  we  are  just reviewing  some  of  the  basic  mathematics, which  is  required  for the  modeling  of  the  kinematics  model of  a  robot  manipulators. Let  us  review  some  of the  key  concepts  in the  last  lectures  before  we  move  on. Here  we  want  to  derive  a  model  so  that given  the  joint  angles of  the  robot,  for  example, given  Join  the  one, join  the  two,  three,  four  and  five. Suppose  that  you  have  five  joints. How  do  we  actually  find the  position  and  orientations of  the  n  e  factor? That  means  that  where  is  this  location? Of  the  end  factor with  respect  to  the  base  stream, and  what  is  the  orientations? In  terms  of  the  rotations of  the  two  frame with  respect  to  the  base  stream. You  can  see  from  this  figure that  involved  two  basic  transformations. First  is  a  rotation. The  orientation  is  basically  described by  how  your  end  factor  frame, which  is  the  mobile  frame. Moving  together  with  the  joint  angle. Which  means  that  as  your  joint  angle  changes, your  mobile  coordinates  will  be  rotated. At  the  same  time,  this  mobile  frame will  be  translated  with respect  to  the  base  ring. Two  types  of  a  basic  transformation which  we  review  in  the  last  lectures in  order  to  model  the  forward  kinematics, three  fundamental  rotations. Y  three,  because  we  are operating  in  a  three  dimensional  space, x  y  z,  right  here, we  call  123,  but actually  is  x  y  z,  cartan  space. This  is  a  rotation  about  x  axis, This  is  a  rotation  about  Y  axis, and  this  is  the  rotation  about  z  axis. This  basically  means  that  there  are three  basic  rotations  in the  three  dimensional  space. For  the  translations,  we  do  not  need three  translation  matrixes  because  we  can put  everything  into  this  single  matrix. This  is  actually  x, and  this  is  actually  translation  of  y. This  is  actually  translations  of  z. Altogether, there  are  four  fundamental transformation  matrixes, and  we  put  it  into  the  homogeneous  codinate, because  that  will  enable  you  to  do matrix  multiplications  and  inverse  metrics. Suppose  that  you  put  a  vector  with  rotations. You  will  get  only  three  times  four. The  idea  of  fundamental transformation  matric  is  very  simple. You  complete  the  square. Instead  of  three  times  four, we  make  it  four  times  four  square  matrix, so  that  we  can  multiply  them  together, and  we  can  also  multiply  with  factors. We  can  also  find  the  inverse  matric  easily. This  was  a  quick  review of  last  week  lectures. The  videos  are  also  recorded, you  may  want  to  review  it  when necessary  before  coming for  the  next  lectures. For  every  lacos.  Here  today, we'll  move  on  to  model  the  kinematics  of robot  manipulators  based  on all  these  coordinate  transformations that  we  have  learned  last  week. Now,  basically,  the  objective of  modeling  for  kinematics, start  by  systematically  assigned  coordinate to  each  of  the  joints  and  links. Then  later  on,  we'll  find the  relationship  between all  of  these  coordinates, and  then  we  multiply  them  together  to  get a  single  composite  transformation  matrix. We'll  also  learn  about composite  transformation  matrix, which  means  that  if  you  rotate  or  translate, with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame, basically  you  post  multiply, post  multiply  and  a  pre  multiply. If  you  operate  it  respect  to the  mobile  frames,  is  the  other  way  round. Today  we  will  apply  all  this  and  also recall  that  for  every  joints, it  can  be  either  a  rotational  joint or  a  translational  joint. Robots  unlike  humans. Human  only  have  revue joints,  can  only  rotate. But  this  is  machine.  In  some  cases, you  may  see  some  extension  of  the  link. This  is  called  prismatic  joint. Here,  we  will  need to  define  four  kinematic  parameters, which  is  required  for  the  modeling of  the  forward  kinematics or  direct  kinematics. Here  there  are  two  joint  parameters and  two  link  parameters. Here  Firstly,  joint  angles. Joint  angle  is  easy  to  understand, is  the  angles  caused  by the  actuation  of  the  motor. That  is  called  the  joint  angles. Here  there's  another  parameter associated  with  the  joints, it's  called  joint  distance. Joint  distance  is  harder  to  understand. But  let  me  show  you  a  actual  robot  first, before  we  come  back  to  this  slide. I  will  cut  up  this  robot  systems  over  here. Now,  for  This  figure  over  here. You  can  see  that  there's  one  joint  over  here. So  imagine  that  there's  a  motto  attached  to this  part  and  you will  start  to  move  this  link. When  this  link  rotate, the  angle  of  this  link respect  to  the  previous  link, will  be  called  the  joint  angle. This  is  easy  to  understand. There's  another  one  which  I  want  to illustrate  to  you  is  this  joint  distance. Joint  distance  can  be  observed  over  here. Now,  this  is  the  joint.  This  is  one  joint. As  I  rotate  this  joint, the  previous  link  is  rotating. So  the  angle  is  changing,  right? Angle  is  changing  because there's  a  motto  there. Now,  joint  distance  is  fixed. Joint  distance  is  actually  the  distance between  the  upper  link  and  the  lower  link. That  means  that  if  you  can  draw the  center  of  this  link,  correct? There's  a  displacement  respect  to the  center  of  the  link,  which  is  below. So  this  is  called  the  joint  distance. Suppose  that  you  go  back to  this  figure  again, it  will  be  easy  to  understand. And  if  you  compare  to the  figure  just  now,  basically, what  we  have  is  that  we have  one  joint  connecting  two  links. This  is  a  joint  where  I  show  you  just  now. Which  is  this  joint  axis. Here  you  must  imagine  that  there's  a  mot connected  to  this  joint  axis and  it  is  rotating  the  link  k, which  means  that  when  this  motor  is  rotating, this  link  will  be  rotating  as  well. As  the  angle  is  changing, we  basically  has  a  joint. This  is  joint  angle. Now,  joint  distance  is actually  distance between  this  link  and  this  link. This  is  called  the  joint  distance.  Weapon. That  means  that  if  the  link are  stacking  on  top  of  each  other, then  there's  a  joint  distance. You  can  also  visualize  that  if  this  link is  just  directly  attached  over  here. Instead  of  this,  then  in  this  case, your  joint  distance  will  be  equal  to  zero. Two  joint  parameters. One  is  the  joint  angle because  this  is  a  revive  joint. The  other  one  is  the  joint  distance. Just  like  one  joint  connecting  two  links. There  are  also  one  link with  two  adjacent  joints. For  example,  over  here, suppose  that  you  have  a  motel. Actuating  this  link.  At  the  other  side, there's  another  motto, actuating  the  next  link. We  have  two  joints.  He  in between,  there's  a  link. In  this  case,  there  are  two link  parameters  as  well. One  is  called  the  link  length. Link  leng  is  actually  easy  to  understand. The  length  of  the  link, the  length  of  the  link. The  other  one  is  called  link  twist  angle. He  link  twist  angle  is slightly  more  difficult  to  understand. Again,  let's  go  to the  actual  robots  to  take  a  look. Over  here,  I  have two  joints.  This  is  joint  one. And  this  is  J  two. Joint  one  joint  two,  and  in  between  the, there's  one  link  in  between  there's  one  link. Joint  one,  joint  two. Now,  you  may  want  to  note  that this  is  the  rotation  axis. Rotation  axis  means  that  this  robot  is rotating  respect  to  line, respect  to  the  line,  and  this  line is  vertically,  vertically  upward. If  you  look  at the  second  joint  and  rotate  it, you'll  see  that  there  are  parallel,  correct? It's  also  vertically  upward. Now,  if  you  go  back  to the  actual  diagram  again, We'll  see  that  actually  over  here, I  have  two  joint  axis and  they  are  not  parallel. They  make  an  angle  between  each  other. Just  now,  the  previous  case, because  they  are  parallel. In  the  sense  that  you  have  one  joint  axis, and  another  joint  axis. Be  they  are  para,  therefore, this  link  twist  angle  will  be  equal  to  zero, will  be  equal  to  zero,  because they  are  par  suppose suppose  that  let  us  assume  that the  motor  is  not  this  way. Suppose  that  the  moto  is  this  way, that  means  that  if the  rotational  axis  is  this  way, while  the  other  one  is  vertical, then  it  will  be  n  degree.  90  degree. Actually  a  link  tis  angle  is  just  the  angle between  the  adjacent  rotational  axis. These  are  the  four  types of  inematic  parameters, two  joint  parameters, and  two  link  parameters. As  for  the  n  factors, usually  we  define  the  coordinate according  to  the  physical  meaning. This  diagram  shows three  dimensional  three  D  coordinates, my  X  Y  Z,  attached  to  the  n  ftors. Over  here,  we  ca  the  vector  in which  the  directions  of the  N  vector  is  pointing towards  the  approach  vector. Which  means  that  if  you  draw  factor, The  direction  in  which  your n  factor  is  pointing, will  we  call  the  approach  vector. This,  for  example,  the  n  factor  may approach  an  object  before  it  grabs  it. In  order  to  grab  it, sometimes  you  also  need  to rotate  your  gripper  directions. Over  here,  we  have  another  vectors because  sliding  vectors. As  the  name  implied,  you  can  visualize  it  as the  sliding  of  the  gripper. The  gripper  can  open  and close  open  and  close. Therefore,  that  is  a  directions, which  is  parallel  to  the  sliding  directions. In  this  case,  take note  that  the  approach  vector  is unique  because  you  don't do  it  in  the  reverse  way. You  approach  in  the  forward  directions. But  sliding  vector  is  not  unique. We  have  two  choices  over  here. One  is  this  way,  he can  be  the  other  way  as  well. Both  are  fine. That  means  that  when  we  assign needs  to  a  robot, we  have  some  flexibility  in  the  assignment. We'll  just  choose  one  of  the  directions. And  after  you  have  fixed  this  two, the  other  one  is  fixed  by  right  hand  rule. That  means  that  after  you  have fixed  two  vectors,  the  other  one, you  must  follow  right  hand  rules to  fix  the  other  axis. Review  your  right  hand  rules is  necessary  because  in  this  course, follow  kinematics, we'll  use  right  hand  rules, to  assign  the  coordinates. He  with  this,  we  are  now  ready  to  introduce the  most  fundamental  algorithms  in  robotics. All  courses  in  robotics  start by  studying  the  kinematics. The  forward  kinematics  models can  be  derived  in  a  very  systematic  way. In  the  early  days,  this researcher  Dan  and  Hardenberg, it  came  up  with  a  systematic  way of  assigning  the  coordinates. This  is  just  a  standardization in  assigning  coordinates. Because  you  imagine  that suppose  that  you  are  given  a  robot. How  do  we  actually  assign  x  y  z  to  the  base? How  do  we  assign  the codinate  to  each  of  the  joint? Which  one  is  which  one  is  y,  which  one  is  z? Suppose  that  you  do  not  standardize to  the  robotics  design. Then  you  can  imagine that  every  one  of  you  will  come, come  up  with  different  coordinate  assignment. If  you  pass  over  to Other  stage  for  fabrications. Those  people  in  the  fabrication  team may  not  be  able  to understand  your  assignment  as  well. DH  algorithms  is  nothing but  a  way  to  standardize  the  assignment. That  means  that  how  should  we  assign  x y  z  to  each  of  the  joints, starting  from  the  base until  we  reach  the  end  factor. As  I  said,  we  are  operating in  a  three  dimensional  space, that  means  that  you  need  to  assign  x,  y  n,  z. Here,  k  is  equal to  zero  means  that  we are  starting  from  the  base. When  k  is  equal  to  n, we'll  reach  the  mobile  frame, which  is  the  n  effector  frame. He  will  start  from  the  base, and  if  you  read  DH  algorithm  carefully, it  says  that  first, using  right  hand  rules  for  all. He  then  make  sure  that the  z  axis  of  your  base  frame. Z  axis  of  the  base  stream, aligned  with  the  axis  of  joint  one. That  means  you  search  for  Joint one  in  the  physical  robot. See  how  is  it  rotated? Then  you  identify  the  joint  axis. That  will  be  your  z  zero  axis. In  fact,  you  can  see  that  Z for  the  subsequent  joints, he  will  be  aligned with  the  axis  of  the  joint. It's  very  easy  to  remember. All  the  joint  axis  will  be  assigned  as  z. All  the  joint  axis  will  be  assigned  as  z. Now,  for  example,  if you  have  a  revenue  joints, revenue  joints,  then  basically this  will  be  the  axis  of  rotation. This  is  rotating  respect  to  this  axis. If  it's  rotating  respect  to  this  axis, there  are  two  directions in  which  you  can  assign  Z. It  could  be  this  direction. It  can  be  the  other  way  round. The  assignment  is  not unique,  it's  not  unique. It's  just  a  standardization with  some  flexibility. What  is  the  difference  in assigning  in  two  directions? The  difference  is  that  according to  right  hand  rules, if  you  assign  this  way, then  this  will  be  your  positive  rotation. You  try  your  right  hand  rules. If  I  this  thumb  is  my  z  axis, and  I  I  curr  this  way, you  can  see  that  this  indicate the  positive  direction. This  is  the  difference.  But  if you  assign  the  other  way  round, If  you  assign  the  other  way  round, then  you  this  w.  Then the  other  directions  will  be  positive. It's  actually  to  tell  you  which  directions  of rotations  will  be  positive and  which  directions  will  be  negative. But  it  is  fine. So  long  as  you  assign it  and  then  draw  clearly  in  the  DH  diagram. Everything  will  be  clear. For  revenue  join  is  quite  easy  to  understand. For  prismatic  joint,  which  means  that you  can  translate,  move. Basically  for  prismatic  joints, is  also  actuated  by  motto. This  is  just  an  illustration  of  how we  create  prismatic  joint, which  is  translational  motion. We  do  not  look  at  this  rotation, because  your  link  will  move  this  way. This  way,  not  rotating, this  is  rotating,  which means  what  you  can  have two  direction  as  well. This  direction  of this  direction  for  translation. What  is  the  meaning? Actually,  nothing  much  because if  you  put  this  way, it  means  this  side  will  be  positive  z. If  you  put  the  other  way, Then  it  means  that the  other  side  will  be  positive  z. This  linear  scale  is  easier  to  understand. For  prismatic  joints,  z, indicate  the  directions  of  positive  z. For  revenue  joints,  it  indicate the  directions  of  the  positive  angle. This  is  how  we  look  at  the  z  axis. Therefore,  first  steps  of DH  algorithms  is  to  identify all  the  rotation  axis  and  as well  as  the  prismatic  joint translation  axis  of  the  joint, and  you  label  them  as  z  axis. Z  zero,  starting  from  z  zero  from  the  base, all  the  way  until  the  end  factor. Next,  then  you  start  to  look  at  all  the  z. This  is  current  z  axis. This  is  the  previous  z  axis. And  then  find  the  intersections  of  them. That  will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  spring. That  means  you  must  see  where the  frame  is  located. After  that, X  is  also  selected  respect  to  z. In  fact,  X  is  assigned  as  a  directions  per particular  to  the  current  z  axis and  the  previous  z  axis. Finally,  y  comes  up naturally  from  right  hand  roles. If  you  are  beginner,  you  see  this  for the  first  time  is  always  confusing. Don't  worry  about  that.  We  will go  through  them  in a  few  examples  and  you must  learn  by  review  it. You  cannot  just  look  at  it  one  time. After  you  after  you've completed  this  lectures  today, if  you  go  back,  if  you time  tomorrow  or  later, you  review  it,  then you  get  a  better  understanding. If  anything  still  not  so  clear, you  watch  the  video  again. So  that  next  week,  you  can come  with  a  better  understanding. This  is  how  we  assign  it  and  we  will go  through  them  one  by one,  using  some  examples. Which  I  will  use  a  very  simple  example first  to  illustrate the  concept.  Only  two  joints. Let  me  show  you  roughly  how  this  works. This  is  quite  common  in  each  robot. That  means  that  if  you  look  at  most  of the  robots, Maybe  I  use  this  one. You'll  see  that  this  is  the  first  joint. Is  actually  trying  to  rotate. Rotate  the  base.  Respect  to the  vertical  axis. This  is  my  first  joint. Where  is  your  z  axis? Vertically  upward,  vertically  upward. As  I  rotate,  you  must  observe  the  joint  axis. Vertically  upwards. This  is  my  z  axis. Then  I  rotate  the  second  joint. My  second  joint  is  coming  out  of  this  bod, if  I  put  it  in  this  direction, coming  out  of  this  board  or into  the  bod,  right? So  there  are  two  motels. The  one  rotation  axis  is  upward. The  other  one  is  coming  out  of the  white  board  or  into  this  white  board. So  if  you  go  back  to this  example  again,  This  is  what  it  means. I  have  motor  one, which  is  rotating  the  base. I'm  only  looking  at  two  joints. I  have  a  motor  one,  which is  rotating  at  the  base. I  have  another  one,  which  is rotating  the  second  link, but  I  do  not  sketch  out  the  second  link, just  to  illustrate  the  concept. Now,  in  your  textbook or  most  of  the  textbook, you'll  see  that  you  only  give  you this  one  and  this  one,  this  one  and  this  one. This  is  because  you're  supposed  to refer  to  the  algorithms  over  here. Refer  to  the  DH  algorithm  over here  and  try  to  sketch  it  out  by  yourself. In  the  lectures,  I'll  show  you  one  by  one, how  to  sketch  it  out.  How  to  sketch  it  out. But  I  would  not  put  it  in the  notes  because  I  want  you to  try  to  sketch  it  out  by  yourself  as  well. But  however,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  e  mail, if  you  think  that  you  need  that, then  you  should  go  to  the  video and  take  a  snapshot. So  that  will  not  be  provided because  you  should  try to  sketch  it  up  yourself. Let's  look  at  this  and  see  how  we can  sketch  this  out  step  by  step, starting  from  this,  how  we  ended  up with  this  DH  diagram  over  here. Firstly,  you  can  see  that  there is  a  motel  Actually, you'll  see  all  this  compartment  for  robots. That  is  to  house  the  motel. Motor  is  inside.  And  as  you send  a  command  from your  computer  to  this  motel, send  a  voltage  signals, for  example,  you'll  start  to  rotate. And  in  this  case,  this is  the  axis  of  rotation. Just  now  I  show  it  to  you. Axis  of  rotation,  you  can  either put  upward  or  downward, upward  or  downward.  So  two  choices. And  you  should  use  right  hand  rules. Suppose  that  you  have  identified  Z, Then  your  thumb  will  be  actually  z. The  other  two  will  be  x  and y,  would  be  x  and  y. X  basically  rotate  towards  y. This  is  how  I  remember.  I  used  my  thumb. Hold  for  a  while  because  it's  auto  power  dum. If  you  put  your  thumb  this  way, and  then  indicate  in  this  co  directions, usually  a  rotate  towards y.  I  will  be,  rotate  towards  y. You  assign  one  of  the  xs, then  the  other  one  will  be  perpendicular. You  should  review  your  right  hand  rules because  we  will use  extensively  in  the  D  assignment. So  let's  come  back  to the  actual  robot  system,  the  scheme. Now  we  have  identified  the  rotation  axis. Therefore,  you  have  two  choices. Ward,  O  downward,  right? Ward  or  downward. Now,  usually,  we  will  choose  upward, because  this  is  basically  the  base. For  example,  on  the  table. If  you  put  z  upward, it  means  that  everything  above  the  base  above the  table  will  be  called  positive  z. Positive  z.  This  is  easier  to  understand. Suppose  that  you  assign  downward, Nothing  wrong  with  that  is just  that  everything that  you  refer  to  will  become  negative  z. I  will  become  negative  z. Usually,  we  will  assign  upward  directions. In  some  cases,  we  need  to exercise  some  of  the  intuitions, physical  meanings  to  assign  it. In  this  case,  maybe  it's  better  to  make z  so  that  everything  will  be  positive. I  assigned  this  way.  This  explain  how  this was  sketched  in  the  textbook. How  about  X  and  y? If  you  refer  to  the  DH  algorithm  again, it  didn't  mention  about  X  and  Y. Which  means  if  it's  not  mentioned, you  have  the  freedom  to  assign  it. An  direction  is  fine. So  long  as  it  satisfied  the  right  hand  group. This  is  something  like  that,  that  means  that you  assign  this  as  the  Z. If  you  want  to  assign  this  as  x,  is  fine. If  someone  else  want  to  assign  this as  x,  is  also  fine. This  can  also  be  x. It's  up  to  you  to  assign. In  fact,  is  quite  easy  to  understand. Imagine  that  I'm  standing  at  this  location. Let  us  standardize  that  above  the  ground  is. But  however,  which  direction  is, which  direction  is,  is  up  to  you  to  define. So  long  as  we  define  it properly  with  a  base  codinate, then  everybody  will  just  refer  to  this. So  over  here, if  you  read  the  algorithm  again, you  only  ask  you  to  define. X  and  y  for  the  base  frame, you  have  some  freedoms. And  the  only  constraint is  that  your  x  and  y  must  be assigned  according  to right  hand  groups,  right? Okay.  As  I  said,  x  rotated towards  y  will  give  you  z. If  you  move  to  joint  two,  there  is a  motto  which  is  mounted  here, and  it  is  rotating  the  next  joint  next  link, which  is  not  shown  over  here. But  the  subsequent  examples, we  will  look  at  the  complete  row  board. And  over  here,  we  can  observe two  things  that  the  rotational  joint  axis. This  is  two  D.  We  are using  two  D  to  illustrate  three  D.  Therefore, if  you  see  this  line drawing  as  a  slanted  angles, it  actually  means  that  it's coming  out  of  the  it  board. If  you  strictly  join in  two  D,  it  will  be  just  one  dog, that  means  that  it's  actually pointing  towards  you  or  away  from  you. Either  pointing  towards  you  or  away  from  you. In  this  case,  there  are  two  choices. You  can  either  choose  z  one,  the  next  joint, to  be  ds  directions, or  you  can  choose  it  to  be  this  direction. Both  are  fine. D  H  assignment  is  not  unique. I  give  you  some  flexibility. Standardization  is  good  but not  to  restrict  too  much. We  will  choose  the  same as  the  textbook  inward. But  there's  nothing  wrong  if  you  choose the  other  way  around.  Both  are  correct. I'll  follow  this  textbook  and  choose  inward, but  I  stress  again, we  can  choose  outward  as  well. This  is  the  first  step  of  DH  algorithm, assign  or  the  rotational  axis of  the  join  as  your  Z  axis. After  that,  everything  will be  respect  to  the  z  axis. So  you  assign  everything  at the  physical  location  of  the  joint. The  next  step  say  is  that  find the  intersections  of  them. That  will  be  the  origin  of  your  next  brim. The  origin  of  your  base  brim is  always  at  the  base. The  origin  of  the  next  brim, you  need  to  extend both  z  and  see  where  they  intercept. The  position  where  the  intercept will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  spring. At  this  stage,  we  only  know Z  one  of  the  next  spring. We  have  not  assigned  x  and  y  yet. The  next  step  is  to  assign  x  assign  x. Everything  is  respect  to  z. You  can  see  that  over  here,  it says  that  just  assign x  to  be  ptogona,  that  means  perpendicular, 90  degree  to  both  of  the  z  axis, current  z  axis  and  the  previous  z  axis. Let's  go  back  to  the  example  again. This  is  my  z  one, going  into  the  y  board. Correct?  This  is  my  z  zero  upward. If  you  draw  it  here,  this  is  z  zero. This  is  z  one, going  into  the  board, and  they  are  90  degree. You  must  select  x  axis, which  is  per  penicar  to  both. It's  very  easy  to  understand. I  is  either  this  way  or  this  way, will  be  per  penicar  to both.  That's  called  auto. Perpendicular  to  both. Again,  your  x  axis  is  not  unique. Some  of  you  may  want  to  do  it  this  way. Some  of  you  may  want  to  do  it  the  other  way. Both  are  correct.  That  means  that if  you  try  to  sketch  it up  and  try  to  compare  answers, typically,  you  will  just  see  that one  will  be  the  directions. The  other  one  may  be  the  other  directions. Both  are  correct  because  as  I  said, it's  just  a  standardization, not  a  restriction. This  is  actually  what  you  need  to  remember because  once  you  have assigned  your  x  and  z  axis, the  other  one  is  just  to use  right  hand  rules  to  find  out  where  is  y. Because  once  you  fix  two  of  them, then  you  just  use  right  hand  rules  to finally  find  the  final  axis, which  is  y.  I  repeat  again, look  at  all  the  joint  axis  of  the  joint, and  then  assign  them  as  z. Then  start  to  interpolate  all  the  z  axis. If  they  intercept,  that  will  be  the  origin. Later  on,  we'll  look  at  some  cases where  they  do  not  intercept. I'll  skip  that  first. After  that,  based  on  z, we  assign  x  to  be  per  particular to  the  current  joint  axis  and the  previous  z  axis. Again,  there's  a  cross  behind. You  can  see  that  sometimes  they are  parallel  means  do  not  intercept. In  this  case,  we  have  a  rule, which  we'll  see  later  on when  we  go  through  another  example. Finally,  once  you  have  selected  z, once  you  have  selected  x, y  is  fixed  by  right  hand  group. Use  right  hand  do  to  assign  it. And  finally,  when  you reach  the  end  factor  frame, there's  a  separate  rule. We  will  look  at  that  later  on  because this  example  does  not  have  a  factor. Just  take  note  that  when you  reach  the  end  factors, we'll  assign  it  according  to sliding  approach  and  the  normal  directions. But  in  this  case,  we  just  use a  very  simple  example to  illustrate  the  concept, and  there's  no  end  factor. I'm  explaining  to  you  how to  obtain  this  graph, which  is  called  DH  di  gram. And  you  should  go  back  to  try  to sketch  it  by  yourself.  Sketch  it. If  you  cannot  get  it, you  review  the  videos, and  then  you'll  see the  sequence  more  clearly. Any  questions  so  far? Based  on  this  diagram, we  can  dive  four  sets  of kinematics  parameters. Remember  two  joint  parameters, two  link  parameters. Joint  angles,  joint  distance, link  length,  links  angles, four  sets  of  parameters. Joingles  can  now  be  formally  defined as  the  angle  between the  x  axis,  with  respect  to  z. Joint  distance  is  the  distance  between  x axis  along  the  joint  axis  z. So  this  first  two,  your  reference  is  Z. And  you  look  at  the  angle between  x  and  the  distance  between  x. This  the  joint  parameters. While  the  next  two  are  the  reverse. You  can  see  that  you  just  replace z  by  x  x  by  z. And  the  link  length  will  be the  distance  between  z,  respect  to  x. Links  angle  is  the  angle  between  joint  axis, respect  to  x  axis. This  is  a  formal  definition. Later  on,  I'll  show  you  the  fiscal  meaning. That  is  easier  to  remember. Because  for  beginners,  it's  always difficult  when  you  first look  at  this  definition. What  does  it  really  mean? You  need  to  go  through  the  examples, then  you  understand  the  meaning and  as  well  as  the  physical  meaning. The  next  part  is that  based  on  this  definitions, I  will  derive  the  four  sets of  kinematic  parameters, which  is  this  table  over  here. Again,  as  I  said, if  you  look  at  all  the  textbooks, you  will  just  put  this  table  there. This  is  because  you  are  expected  to try  to  derive  it, so  that  you  have  a  better  understanding, especially  when  you  are  beginners. Over  here,  four  sets  of  kinematic  parameters, but  take  note  that  only  one  is  available. Only  one  of  them.  Because  there's only  one  motel  at  each  joint,  correct? If  you  look  at  joint  one, then  you  know  that  T  one  will  be  rotating. The  others  will  be  constant. Only  one  variable, the  others  will  be  constant. If  it's  a  variable,  you'll  just  put  t  one. You  don't  have  to figure  out  what  is  the  angle. In  this  case,  just  for  information, Ter  is  the  angle  between  X  zero  and  X  one, correct?  We  respect  two. Respect  to  z  zero,  respect  to  z  zero. You  can  see  that  at  this  configuration, your  angle  is  equal  to  zero. That  means  that  if  you  sketch  it  out. Directly  angle  between  x currently  is  equal  to  zero. But  let  me  stress  this, do  not  put  zero  there  because  you  are  driving the  forward  kinematics  model and  you  sketch  it  out  at  this  configuration, which  happened  that  the  one  is  equal  to  zero. If  you  put  t  one  equal  to  zero, then  you  cannot  derive the  pokematic  model  because pokematic  model  says  that given  any  joint  angle, say  T  one,  right, D  two,  and  so  on. You  need  to  find  the  positions and  orientations  of  the  and  refector. Which  means  that  you  must  derive  a  model  with any  title  so  that  you  can  use  it  to  calcrate. If  you  put  Deter  one  equal  to  zero, you  are  only  driving  the  position and  orientation  at the  particular  configuration. Always  put  the  joint  angle  as  a  variable. But  if  you  want,  you  can  just put  zero  bracket. That  means  that  currently  it's  equal  to  zero. If  you  look  from  the  top  of  this  robot, Look  from  the  top  of  this  robot, you  will  see  this  x  and  y. This  is  X,  this  is. Imagine  that  you  look from  the  top  towards  the  base  top  view. And  I  sketch  it  over  here. This  is  x.  This  is  y. Now,  suppose  that  the  joint  one received  some  signal  from your  computer,  and  start  to  rotate. Joint  one  will  rotate,  and because  we  assign  upward,  c? This  z  axis  is  pointing  towards  you. Imagine  you  look  from  the  top  down, the  z  axis  will  be  pointing  towards  you. If  you  put  right  hand  rules  here, that  will  be  positive  directions. Because  it's  pointing  upwards. This  basically  means  that  any  rotations, suppose  that  the  motel  start  to  rotate. This  will  be  your  joint  angle.  On  angle  one. It  is  rotating  respect  to a  fixed  spring  because there  will  be  a  base  bring, which  is  always  fix  x  zero  here, y  zero  is  always  here. On  top,  you  will  see  another  x. We  call  x  one. X  one  will  move  together  with  your  lin. X  one  will  move  together  with  a  link. That  means  as  the  motel is  rotating,  you'll  move  link  one. You'll  move  n  one,  as  a  result, the  directions  of  link indicated  by  x  one  will  change. As  a  result,  there  will be  an  angle  between  them. This  is  how  it  looks  like.  Let  me show  you  the  actual  robot  over  here. This  is  joint  one. In  one.  Imagine  that there  is  a  base  frame which  is  fixed  below  it. It  does  not  rotate.  Fixed  below  it. If  this  is  x  axis, and  as  for  as  for  the  x  one, is  actually  rotating  when the  joint  is  rotating. You  can  see  that  the  second  link  is  rotating. The  angle  between  the  link  and your  base  f  x  axis  will  be  the  joint  angle. This  is  the  meaning  of  this  definition. The  next  one,  the  next  kinematic  parameters, in  fact,  the  joint  parameters, is  called  the  joint  distance. Joint  distance  is  the  distance between  order  x  axis. X  zero  and  x  one. If  you  look  at  this  figure  over  here, x  zero  is  here,  x  one  is  here. X  zero  is  here,  x  one  is  here, and  that  is  a  displacement  of  D. Displacements  of  D.  Actually, the  link  the  joint  distance is  this  physical  distance. Maybe  you  can  go  to  the  actual  roads D  and  measure,  t  CM. Then  you'll  put  20  cm  part. Usually  when  we  derive  the  kinematics  models, we  don't  use  a  specific  number. Usually  we'll  put  d, Peta,  Why  is  it  so? Because  as  far  as  the  robot  companies, robot  manufacturing  company  is  concerned, they  will  not  just  make  one  robot. They  will  make  a  family  a  robot. So  can  be  smaller,  20  CM. Some  can  be  30  CM, some  can  be  50  CM, the  same  kinematic  structures but  different  sizes. In  this  case,  we  should  dive a  more  general  kinematics  model  so that  as  and  when  we  want to  make  different  sizes, we  just  plug  different kinematic  parameters  into  it. Usually,  if  you  look  at  the  textbook, you'll  see  that  it  will  be something,  which  can  changes. But  in  some  cases,  it  will  be  fixed. A,  for  example,  the  next  two, you  can  see  that  we  do  not  put any  variable  there  because e  is  always  fixed  in  this  case. Why  is  it  so?  Now  we  are looking  at  the  link  parameters. Link  parameters  will  be the  relation  between  z, with  respect  to  x,  the  other  way  round. Just  now  was  the  relation between  x  with  respect  to  z, so  now  is  the  other  way  round. We  can  first  see that  the  distance  between  z  zero  and  z  one. Le  take  note  there's  a  reference, with  respect  to  x  one,  is actually  equal  to  zero. If  you  look  at  it  carefully,  z  zero, I  mark  it  in  rate,  z one,  also  marked  in  rate. The  reference  is  what  your  x0x, x  x  axis  over  here. That  means  that  they  are  all  on this  line.  On  this  line. If  one  is  here,  the  other  one  is  here, then  there's  a  displacement  between  them, but  they  are  all  on  the  same  line. Along  the  x  equal  to  zero,  in  fact. Therefore,  the  link  length  in  this  case, is  equal  to  zero. L  links  angle  will  be the  angle  of  these  two  rotational  axis. These  two  rotational  axis. Firstly,  maybe  I  just  reproduce  it  here. This  is  z  zero,  and  this  is  z  one. Remember,  z  one  means  that it  is  pointing  into  the  white  bod, pointing  into  the  white  bot, and  therefore,  it  is  90  degree. You  see  this  90  degree  here,  Pi  over  two. But  there  is  a  sign. There  is  a  sign.  This  sign  is determined  by  x  one. The  reference  is  x  one. X  one  is  here,  and  if  you  draw  x  one  here, then  you  can  determinate  the  sin. Because  according  to  the  right  hand  rules, According  to  right  hand  rules, my  thumb  is  my  x  one. If  I  rotate,  rotate, z02z1,  is  against  this  direction. This  is  positive  direction. That  means  that  if  you  put  your  um, for  now  your  x  one  is  a  reference, which  is  your  thumb,  and the  positive  direction will  be  this  direction. However,  z one  towards  z  z  zero  towards  z  one, is  the  other  way  round, so  you'll  become  negative. The  other  way  round  of  your  right  hand  root. You  must  use  right  hand  roots to  determinate  the  sign  e. Therefore,  we  have  a  negative  sign  there. So  I  say  again,  90  degree  is  clear. Sine,  dim  by  the  reference. In  this  case,  is  x  one. And  we  use  right  hand  room. Now,  is  quite  hard to  remember  all  this  definition, which  one  we  respect  to  which  one. But  if  you  understand  the  physical  meaning, then  it  will  be  very  easy  to  derive  it. Here  I  show  you  the  physical  meaning. Actually,  this  kinematic  parameters  tells  you the  relationship  of  this  mobile  frame with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame, which  is  what  we  studied  last  week. There  will  be  rotation  and translation,  rotation  and  translation, and  the  four  sets  of  chinematic  parameters tells  you  how  your  coordinates. You  must  imagine  that initially  they  are  together. How  this  mobile  frame, which  is  initially  here, move  to  this  location. I  say  again,  you  must  imagine that  there  are  two  frames, one  mobile  frame,  one  fixed  frame. Initially,  they  are  coincide  together. Then  you  start  to  visualize  how this  mobile  frame  will  move  to  this  location. And  from  there,  you'll  be  able to  figure  out  the  relationship  between  them. Right?  How  does  it  move from  your  fixed  frame  to the  final  position  will  tells  you the  relationship  between  the  mobile  frame with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. In  fact,  here,  I  put  this  way. Align  x  first,  then  align  z,  right? That  means  that  we  look  at  how the  frames  are  rotated, translated,  to  align  X, then  finally  align  z to  move  to  this  location. Right. Let  us  look  at  the  detail just  amplify  this  figure  over  here, and  we  have  two  frames  initially  coincide. You  must  imagine  that  together  x  one, y  one,  z  one. Initially,  they  are  all  at  the  base  frame. I  want  to  visualize  how  you move  to  the  upper  frame. Indicated  by  the  DH  diagram. Firstly,  you  can  see  that  x  is  al  aligned. This  means  Peter  is  equal  to  zero. But  don't  put  theta  equal  to  zero,  correct? Because  as  this  angle rotate,  just  now  I  show  it  to  you. This  one  naturally  will  rotate, that  form  the  joint  angle. Do  not  put  it  as  zero. Otherwise, you  can't  get  the  kinematics  model. We  can  see  that  there's  a  displacement between  these  two  Xs. Along  the  z  axis,  correct? There's  a  displacement  between  them. In  fact,  here,  this  is  what  happened. You  will  have  to  move  upward. Correct?  That  means  that initially  they  are  coincide. And  it  has  to  translate along  the  directions  of  z  to  that  location. Now,  this  is  your  location, but  this  is  the  target  location. Z  must  be  pointing  into  the  white  board. You  still  have  some  more  operations. In  this  case,  you  need  to  align  z now  because  you  have  already  aligned. Initially,  it  was  here. Then  you  moved. X  is  now  aligned. But  z  is  not  aligned  yet. This  is  your  mobile  frame, and  you  want  to  rotate it  downward  in  order  to  align. And  at  this  stage, you  can  see  that  the  origin  are  now  the  same. Therefore,  there's  no  more  translation. You  do  not  need  to  translate  to  align  the  z. Need  not  translate  to  align  the  Z. There's  a  translation  of  zero. If  your  target  is  here, that  means  that  if  z  is  here, instead  of  here,  then you  still  need  to  translate. But  in  this  case,  it's  no  more  translation. You  only  need  to  rotate. At  this  stage,  take  note  that your  x  is  already  the  same,  correct? So  you  change  to  x  one  now. Okay.  You  changed  to  x one  now  because  they  are  the  same. And  finally,  you  rotate. Right?  All  this  is  respect  to  the  mobile  xs. You  rotate.  By  joint  angle, translate  by  joint  distance, translate  by  lin  length, rotate  by  link  tres  angle  to  move from  the  base  prime  to  the  final  location. The  final  one  is  to indicate  using  right  hand  rules, we  know  that  this  direction  will  be  positive. This  is  90  degree. No  problem,  but  there's  a  direction. This  direction  will  be  positive, but  now  we  want to  rotate  the  other  way  round. In  order  to  rotate,  you  must  flip  the  arrows, which  is  now  upwards, pointing  into  the  white  board, which  is  90  degree. And  it  is  against  right  hand  rule, which  means  that  the  final  one, you  just  flip  it  this  way  and it's  against  the  right  hand  rule because  this  is  your  reference  now. I  will  be  this  directions, but  we  are  rotating the  other  way  around,  so  it's  negative. This  explain  this  negative  angle because  it's  90  degree  and  it's against  the  directions  of assigned  by  right  hand  role with  X  as  my  reference  know. This  is  a  physical  meaning, that  means  that  if  you can't  remember  the  definition. You  just  imagine  two  frames initially  coincide. How  you  move  to  this  location, by  first  align,  then  align  z. From  there,  you  also understand  that  this  four  sets  of kinematics  parameters  actually  tells you  the  relationship  between the  coordinate  spring. How  this  coordinate  frame  is  related  to this  frame  after  a  sequence of  rotation  and  translation. You  go  in  this  sequence, rotate  translate, rotate,  with  respect  to  the  mobile  axis. Okay,  we  will  look  at  one  more  example. Over  here,  we  have  a  more  complete  robot. Just  now  I  only  show  you  here  actually. This  one.  Most  of the  structures  are  the  same. Actually  this  is  a  bit sometime  you'll  see  different  housing, but  they  are  mostly  the  same. In  the  sense  that  the  base will  have  this  rotational  axis. Then  here  you  have  another  two  joints. It  can  be  in  different  configuration, but  usually  the  first  two  joints will  be  quite  similar. Then  the  first  three  joints  will  be the  what  major  axis,  Major  axis, because  when  you  move  the  first  three  joints, you  can  figure  out  the  work  space in  the  three  dimensional  space. The  remaining  joint. When  we  say  remaining  joint because  it  can  be  for  example  two, in  this  case,  one  and  two. It  can  be  three.  It  can  be  more  than  that. Here,  we  only  have  two  minor  three  major. Altogether,  five  degree  of  freedom. Which  means  that  you  may  not  be  able  to orientate  the  end  factor  in  some  directions. No  any  directions  in  three  dimensional  space. But  all  this  is depending  on  your  applications, suppose  that  in  some  applications, you  do  not  need  six  degree  of  freedoms, you  can  buy  robots  with lesser  degree  of  freedom because  it's  always  cheaper. I'll  show  you  roughly  how  this  look  like. Let's  go  back  to  this  robot again.  First  join  s. First  join.  You  can  see  that  as  I  rotate, the  first  three  join,  my  factor move  drastically.  A  second  join. We've  seen  this  also  just  now, the  second  join,  right? Now,  this  is  variable,  correct? You  do  not  put  a  constant  in  your  DH  table. Do  not  put  a  constant  in  your  table,  right? This  is  variable,  and  this  is  third  joint. Even  though  there  is a  hydraulic  actuator  there, but  the  joint  axis  is  still  here. Join  axis  is  still  here. This  is  the  next  joint  axis. As  you  can  see,  as  I  rotate  joint  one,  two, three,  my  end  efector  move  drastically. But  the  remaining  joints, there  are  only  two  acts. I  think  it  is  this  one. And  the  last  one.  This  one,  rotate. This  robot  shot  of  one  joint,  right? You  cannot  achieve  any  orientation. Now,  the  joints  are  variables and  you  want  to  sketch  it  in the  two  dimensional  space. DH  diagram  is  two  dimensional. This  basically  means  that  you  have to  visualize  a  little  bit some  of  the  coordinate  assignments. That's  the  first  thing.  Second  thing is  to  take  note that  your  joint  angles  is  a  variable. When  you  sketch  it,  of,  you  have  to  fix  it. Can't  sketch  moving  robots  on  the  paper. Basically,  what  we  do  is  that  we fix  at  one  configuration, fix  at  one  configuration. The  drawing  you  will  see  that  is that  we  will  fix  in  this  way. But  take  note,  you  can  draw  a  different  way. That  means  that  you may  want  to  draw  this  way, also  can  or  vertically  upwards, you  may  want  to  draw  two upwards  and  then  one  downward. I  can't  show  it  here,  so this  will  be  horizontal. Imagine  this  one  will  be  horizontal. This  will  be  vertical.  Also  can. As  long  as  the  joint  there, you're  free  to  rotate  it. If  there's  no  joint  de,  do  not  rotate  it. For  example,  this  link is  fixed  configuration. You  can't  rotate  it.  Go  back  to  this  one. You  can  see  the  relationship clearly  with  the  animations  where we  have  basically  one  joint  first  joint to  rotate  the  base. Then  we  have  another  joints. We  call  the  shoulders, rotate  this.  This  is  the  third  joint. The  remaining  two  just to  orientate  the  iators, where  we  have  a  pitch  and  roll  only. We  do  not  have  the  in this  case  for  this  particular  robot. Altogether,  five  axis. Now  again,  this  is what  you  should  try  to  sketch. Sketch.  How  do  we  sketch  using DH  algorithm  or  DH  representation, or  DH  assignment. I  start  by  identify  all  the  joint  axis, which  means  that  you  should identify  all  the  joint  axis. These  are  the  joint  axis. Then  sketch  your  z  at the  actual  joint  axises. This  is  how  it  works. You  can  see  that  all  the  z  axis are  marked  by  grad  one. We'll  go  through  the  DS  algorithm  one  by  one, starting  from  the  base, starting  from  the  base. Now,  dS  algorithm  says that  if  you  are  at  the  base, assign,  as  the  axis  of  joint  one. Axis  of  joint  one,  which  means  that  you  go  to the  actual  robot  again and  see  how  it  is  rotated. Is  how  it  is  rotated.  That  means what  your  z  axis  will  be pointing  upward  or  downward, upward  or  downward. As  I  mentioned  just  now, in  this  case,  even  though  we  have the  freedom  to  choose  upward  or  downward, we  should  choose  upward  so that  everything  above  the  base, will  be  considered  as  positive  z  coordinates. Otherwise,  you  deal  with  negative  z. This  is  the  first  assignment,  x  and  y. Up  to,  to  you. Imagine  that  you  have  this  robot. All  it  says  is  that  let's  assign  z as  x  and  y  up  to  you. For  example,  maybe  the company  want  to  call  this  x. Go  ahead.  Another  company want  to  call  this  x  is  also  fine. So  long  as  you  assign  properly, put  into  the  diagram. Subsequently,  everybody will  be  able  to  refer  to  it. This  is  how  we  assign  the  base  sing. Now,  base  print  will  be  our  reference  sprint. Very  important  coordinate, the  reference  sprint, in  which  all  the  commands of  the  robots  are  issue. It  will  be  respect  to  the  base  spring. That  means  that  where  is  the  object? Where's  the  top  of  the  table, respect  to  the  base  string, that  means  z  is  equal  to  one. Where's  the  location  with  respect  to  x? Where's  the  location  with  respect  to  z? That  would  be  the  reference. And  I  it  speaks  with  respect  to  the  base. Now,  we  have  then selected  x  in  this  directions. But  if  you  want  to  put  this  way,  also  can. Even  this  also  can,  This  also can  or  even  any  directions. So  long  as  you  identify  it  and  fix  it mark  it  down  so  that subsequently  everybody will  be  able  to  use  it. This  course  teach  you  from the  perspective  of a  robotics  engineer,  not  a  user. User  is  programming, factory  operator  can  also  program. But  I  send  you  a  optional  course. If  you're  interested,  you  can go  and  try  out  the  robot  programming, just  sign  up  following  the  link. You  can  actually  learn  how  to  program  it, but  different  company  will  have a  different  programming  language  actually. Next,  we  move  on  to  the  next  joint. Maybe  we  go  back  to  compare  again. This  is  the  next  joint,  o  to  this  joint  one. I  put  it  at  this  configuration. This  is  my  joint  two.  Joint  two. I  put  it  in  a  configuration so  that  it's  easier  to  sketch. This  basically  means  that my  second  joint  axis  is either  pointing  out  or  pointing  inwards. Of  the  hit  ball.  You  must  imagine  this  is two  D  is  rotating  here. It's  either  pointing  to  or  away  from  you. It's  rotating  this  way. Which  means  two  choices  again. Z  one  can  be  this  way,  the  other  way  round. Both  are  fine.  Both  are  fine. There  are  some  flexibility  in  this. I'll  follow  the  textbook  pointing inwards.  This  is  the  next  step. The  joint  axis  of  joint two  is  selected  as the  z  axis  of  the  next  spring. Base  brain  is  zero,  next  gram  is  one. After  that,  we  extend  both  z  axis. And  see  where  intercepts  intercepts  here. Therefore,  that  will  be the  origin  of  the  next  spring. This  is  what  zh  algorithm  says. After  that,  based  on  this  origin, you  start  to  sketch  x  and  y. X  is  a  vector, which  is  perpendicular  to  z. You  may  want  to  sketch  it here  if  you  are  confused. This  is  z  zero,  this  is  z  one. Therefore,  your  x  can  be this  way  or  the  other  way. Both  are  perpendicular  to  both. That  means  that  again, you  have  two  choices  to  fix  your  x  as  this. I  will  choose  this  one,  this  direction. But  I  stress  again,  if  you  choose the  other  way  round,  it's  also  fine. After  you  have  fixed  x,  y  is  unique. Y  is  unique  because  you  must borrow  right  hand  row. X,  rotate  towards  y,  give  you  z. This  is  how  the  y  axis  is  assigned. In  fact,  so  far  what  I've  done  is  similar  to the  previous  example,  Exactly  the  same. Usually,  most  of  the  robots  will  have this  very  common  configuration for  the  first  two  joints. If  you  move  on  to  the  next  joint, you'll  see  that  it's  actually parallel  to  the  previous  joint. Suppose  that  you  look  at  this  the  joint. I  use  a  different  robot  but they  have  similar  structure  as  you  can  see. This  is  my  joint  axis. That  means  that  even though  it's  actuated  by  something  else, this  is  my  joint  axis. Joint  axis  is  where  your  joint  is  rotating. Don't  be  confused  by  the  hydraulic  actuator. This  is  still  your  joint  axis, which  means  that  it  is  s, pointing  towards  you  or  away  from  you. Again,  over  here,  you  have  two  choices. You  can  either  choose  z two  to  be  away  from  or  pointing  towards  you. But  however,  previously, you  have  chosen  one  in  the  same  direction. Which  is  pointing  inwards. Perhaps  you  should  follow. As  to  simplify  your  kinematic  parameters, because  if  z  are  parallel, it  means  what,  your link  Trese  angle  will  be  equal  to  zero. If  you  point  the  other  direction, your  link  tree  angle  will  be  180  degree. It's  up  to  you,  but  usually  we  can  assign  it in  a  certain  way  which  make our  chlmatic  parameters  simpler. Later  on,  we'll  see  that  your link  tree  angle  will  be  equal  to  zero because  the  angle  between  the  z x  is  the  linrese  angle. Now,  this  is  where  there's  a  problem  now. Because  if  you  extend  these  two  z  xs, They  do  not  intercept because  they  are  parallel. The  first  statements  of  second  item second  step  over  here,  is  not  valid  anymore. You  cannot  select the  intersections  of  the  Z  axis. This  is  where  there's  an  cross  behind. If  they  do  not  intercept, then  use  the  intersections  of  the  current  Z with  a  common  normal  between  the  z  axis. Actually  if  you  go  back  to  here, you  will  actually  see  a  common normal  which  is  the  blue  line. Why  is  it  called  a  common  normal? Because  it  is  perpendicular  to  z  one, z  two,  I  is  perpendicular  to  z  one  and  z  two, that  means  that  z  one  is  pointing  inwards, z  two  is  pointing  inwards. If  you  draw  this  line, it  will  be  also  perpendicular  to  both. This  common  normal  become  a  reference. The  intersections  of  the  common  normal, intersection  of  this  common  normal  with your  currency  axis  will be  selected  as  the  origin. If  you  go  back  to  here, the  intersections  of  this with  this  will  be selected  as  the  origin  of  the  next  spring. This  is  what  the  next  cross  is  about. Finally,  We  also  see that  you  need  to select  x  to  be  perpendicular  to  the  z. Now,  common  normal  is  perpendicular  to  both. That's  why  it's  called  common  normal. But  there  is  one  more  cross. It  says  that  in  this  case, just  point  the  X  away from  the  previous  joint. This  basically  means  that  here you  should  point  to  this  way. Do  not  point  the  other  way  around. Because  your  previous  joint  is  here, you  point  away  from the  previous  joint  along  the  common  normal. Why  along  the  common  normal? Because  x  is  always  perpendicular  to  z. X  is  always  perpendicular  to  z. Common  normal  is  perpendicular  two, z  one  and  z  two. That's  why  it's  called  common  normal. Lastly,  come  out  naturally from  right  hand  rule  after  we have  fixed  x  and  z. If  you  move  on  to  the  next  joint, actually  is  similar  to  the  previous  joint. This  is  how  it  is  rotated. Maybe  I'll  just  show  it  again. Let  me  align  this  first so  that  it's  easier  to  see. If  this  is  the  joint, you  can  see  that  also  the same  for  this  particular  robot, which  means  that  similar. In  fact,  if  you  see  this  similar  structures. After  a  while,  if  you're  confident, you  just  draw  up  the  same  thing.  Same  thing. You  can  see  that  they  are  para, everything  is  the  same  because  z two  and  three,  do  not  intersect. You  put  a  common  normal. Intersections  of  common  normal  with z  is  the  origin  of  the  next  frame. Then  x  three  will  be  along the  common  normal  pointing away  from  the  previous  joint. We  get  this  next  codinate. Now,  the  next  one  is  a  bit  tricky. Let  us  look  at  this  by aligning  it  properly  first. The  last  joint  is  this  one. You  can  see  that  the  gripper is  rotating  because  you  want  to align  the  gripper  so  that  you can  orientate  it  to  pick  up  a  part, for  example,  This  needs some  rotational  angle  over  here. Now,  where  is  your  rotational  axis? This  one.  This  is  your  rotational  axis. Observe  again,  rotate  respect  to the  axis  in  the  approach  direction  actually. This  is  the  approach  directions. This  is  your  rotational  axis. If  you  come  back  to  here  again, you'll  see  that  the  z  axis  of the  next  join,  should  be  here. Should  be  here.  Z  four. Because  it's  rotating  this  way. Z  four  actually  should  be  here. It's  rotating  this  way. That  means  that  if  you  draw  it over  here,  this  will  be  z  four. Then  if  you  intercept  it  with  this  one, the  origin  should  be  here. I  say  again,  for  example,  if  it's  here, z  four,  and the  previous  z  axis  is  here,  z  three. If  you  intercept  them, they  have  the  same  origin. In  some  cases,  they  may  have  the  same  origin. But  when  this  happened, suppose  that  you  keep drawing  your  same  diagram, same  code  needs,  overlapping. You  can  see  that  you  will  be  very  confusing. Sometimes  you'll  see  this  dash  line. It  means  that  they  have  the  same  origin. But  however,  for  arity  of  presentations, let's  move  it  out. Move  it  out.  That  is easier  to  see  the  assignment,  right? But  we  indicate  a  dash  line, not  a  solid  line  so  that we  know  that  this  origin is  supposed  to  be  here. This  origin  is  supposed  to  be  here, but  we  just  draw  it at  a  certain  distance  away, so  that  is  easier  for  user  to  see. This  is  my  next  sketching. I'll  draw  z  here, but  actually  is  here. Then  I  can  assign  x  because  this  is  z  three, and  this  is  z  four. They  are  at  the  same  origin  by  sketched  here, and  to  assign  x, it  has  to  be  either  upward  or  downward. That  is  perpendicular  to  both. Here,  I  will  assign  upward, but  downward  is  also  fine. Actually,  they  are  together, but  you  sketch  it  here. Sketch  it  here  with  the  dash  line, indicating  that  they should  have  the  same  origin. That  means  that  there's  no  translation  here, only  rotation.  No  translation. Some  of  all  the translation  parameters  you  see later  will  be  equal  to  zero  because  there's no  translation  only  rotation. Remember, there  are  four  transformation  rotate  rotate. Of  the  joint  angles. I  translate  along  the  link  length, then  translate  sorry, rotate  joint  angles, translate  joint  distance, then  translate  link  length, then  rotate  links  angle. Some  of  the  parameters  is  zero, in  this  case,  no  translation,  only  rotation. We  draw  upwards  and y  comes  up  naturally  from  right  hand  rules. Finally,  when  you  reach the  end  effector  frame, then  there  is  this  close  here. Watch  out  for  this  close. It  says  that  once  you  reach  the two  the  end  effector  frame, you  should  assign  z  as  the  approach  vector. As  the  sliding  vector, and  X  will  be  fixed  after  you  have assigned  the  approach  vectors and  the  sliding  vector. Here  at  any  fector  frame, we  assign  according  to  the  fiscal  meaning. Approach  directions  of the  end  factor,  opening, closing  directions  of  the  gripper, and  lastly,  x  is  perpendicular  to  both. Watch  out  for  this  close  close and  proceed  to  assign  the  last  spring. Which  is  over  here. This  is  my  approach  direction. That  will  be  z. Sketch  your  any  factor, opening  and  closing  direction, so  you  have  two  choices  this  way  or  this  way. If  you  sketch  your  any  factor  this  way, then  this  will  be  your  approach. This  or  the  other  way round  will  be  your  sliding. This  frame  will  be  rotated together  with  a  gripper. As  it  is  rotating, you  can  see  that the  sliding  direction  will  change. All  right.  This  is how  we  assign  the  coordinate, starting  from  the  base  frame, all  the  way  until  the  end  defector  frame. Now,  as  I  said,  do  not  just  read  it, you  have  to  try  to  sketch  it. That  means  that  start  from  a blank  piece  of  paper. Slowly  assign  one  by  one. To  see  whether  you  can  get  something  similar. When  I  say  similar,  is  because  it's not  unique,  not  unique. Some  can  be  one  directions. The  other  one  could  be  opposite  directions. Usually,  your  answers  we  different  by a  plus  minus  sign  sometime.  Any  questions? Hey,  based  on  this  DH  digram, again,  we'll  be  able  to derive  four  sets  of  kinematics  parameters. In  the  earlier  examples, Based  on  this  two,  we  derive this  first  set.  Then  you  just  move  on. Based  on  this  two,  you can  derive  the  second  set. Move  on  to  and  this  and  this  will  be  fourth. Finally,  this  respect  to this  will  be  the  fifth  one. You  just  look  at  the  relationship from  one  coordinate  to  another. The  idea  is  this,  suppose that  this  one  is  initially  here, how  you  move  to  here. Next,  suppose  that  this one  was  initially  here. Imagine  how  you  move  to  this  location. And  similarly,  this  has to  move  to  this  location. Here,  it  has  to  rotate  to  this  configuration. There's  no  translation. Finally,  this  one  is  supposed  to  be here  and  how  it  moved  to this  location  will  tells  you the  relationship  between each  joint  and  the  link. All  these  need  to  do  it  carefully. I'll  show  you  one  by  one  for  these  examples, and  as  I  said,  do  go back  to  try  it  by  yourself. The  first  one  is  the  same  as the  previous  example,  same. We'll  skip  this  one  and move  on  to  the  second  one. The  second  one  actually  tells  you the  relationship  between  these two  coordinate  frame. Firstly,  if  you  have  a  variable  D  two, put  the  two  here. Do  not  put  the  two  equal  to  zero. Because  D  is  the  angle between  x  one  and  x  two, respect  to  z  axis, respect  to  z  axis. And  they  are  equal  to  zero  at  this  stage. Actually,  you  can  imagine  that  this  rotate, if  this  rotated,  Then the  second  lin  will  be  rotated. This  is  your  x  one,  this  is  x  two, then  you'll  start  to  form  an  angle, which  is  er  two. Which  one  is  positive,  which  one  is negative,  defined  by  your  z. Zero  inwards.  Right  hand  rule says  that  this  direction  will  be  positive. The  other  direction  will  be  negative  angle. This  give  you  the  sign. But  do  not  put  zero. If  you  want,  you  can  put t  zero,  but  don't  put  zero. Once  you  put  zero,  it's  wrong because  you're  not  modeling the  forward  kinematics  anymore. You're  just  looking  at a  particular  configuration. Next,  the  x  axis. There's  no  translation  needed  with  respect  to z  because  they  are  on  this  white  board, and  translation  along  z  is into  the  white  board  is  positive, but  they  are  on the  same  two  dimensional  plate. There's  no  translation. Therefore,  you  get  zero  here. This  explain  why  this zero  is  here  because  there's no  translations  of  x  along  z. Next,  there's  a  translations of  z  with  respect  to  x. Be  z  one  is  here,  z  two  is  here. There  is  a  distance  between  lang, that's  called  the  link  length. Here,  we  put  A  two,  because as  I  said,  usually, The  company  will  put the  variable  in  the  sense that  there  will  be  different  model. One  maybe  a  two  equal  to  ten  CM. The  other  one  maybe  50  CM, different  sizes, but  same  kinematic  structures. This  enable  the  company  to  come  out  with different  kinematic  model  easily  just by  substituting  with  different  parameters. But  for  some  cases,  they  are  constant. For  instance,  the  link  is angle  is  constant.  You  cannot  change  it. It's  fixed  in  the  sense that  this  joint  angle, this  joint  axis  and this  joint  axis,  they  are  parallel. If  they  are  parle, there's  no  angle  between  them. Angle  is  equal  to  zero, and  therefore,  you  have a  link  to  this  angle  of  zero. This  is  based  on  definition. As  I  said,  the  other  way  is  to  imagine that  two  frames  initially  coincide. This  frame  will  move  to  this  location. Initially,  how they  will  move  to  this  location. Over  here,  you  can  see that  There's  only  one  translation. Only  one  translation  is  required. Just  translate  here,  which  is  this  one. There's  no  rotation  because these  two  are  parallel, you  just  need  to  translate. Now,  once  you  get  this  one, the  next  one  is  the  same,  correct? This  respect  to  this is  similar  to  this  respect  to  this. The  only  difference  is  that this  two  length  may  be  different. May  be  different.  In  a  sense that  we  may  not  want  to make  a  two  equal  to  A  three. We  may  want  it  to  have a  different  ling  length. You  can  just  copy  down, similar  to  the  previous  one. In  fact,  it's  just  a  translation to  align  it  from  one  frame  to  another. The  next  one  is  even  easier  because  remember, I  say  that  if  there's  a  dash  line, it  means  that  no  translation. You  put  the  translation  to  zero. Then  variable,  also  known  to  think, put  a  variable  there,  four. The  only  thing  that  you  need  to  figure out  will  be  the  link  twist  angle. Link  twist  angle  will  be  the  angle between  the  two  z  axis  marked  by  red. Respect  to  the  current  x  axis. I  sketch  it  over  here so  that  it's  easier  to  see. This  is  my  z, this  one  into  the  white  board. And  they  have  the  same  origin. You  have  to  imagine  that this  z  four  is  actually  here. Z  four  is  actually  here. So  they  have  the  same  origin, and  my  x  four is  perpendicular  to  both,  correct? Now,  the  link  tres  angle is  the  angle  between  these  two, which  is  90  degree. They  are  perpendicular,  you  put Pi  over  two,  90  degree. Here  next,  you  must  determine the  sign  because the  Z  axis  should  move  from  this  to  this. Move  from  this  to  this  in  order to  move  to  the  final  configuration. That  means  that  initially  they  coincide, how  z  three  will  move  to  z  four. It  must  rotate  by  Pi  over  two. According  to  the  right  hand  rules, if  this  is  your  reference, then  this  direction  will  be  positive, but  is  the  other  way round.  The  other  way  round. We  put  the  negative. Explain  why  we  have  a  negative  sign  over here  because  it's  this  way, right  hand  rule  is this  way,  is  the  other  way. Therefore,  put  a  negative  sign  there and  that  gives  us  the  link  twist  angle. Last  one,  for  the  joint five  is  the  relationship  between  this  one, which  is  actually  here  and  this  one. You  must  actually  imagine  that  it  is  here. This  is  your  X  four, and  this  is  your  z  four.  I  is  actually  here. But  you  can  see  that  if I  sketch  it  here,  basically, it  completely  overlap  with  the  previous  one, three,  x  y,  z  three, and  you  will  mess  up  your  drawing. Usually  you  sketch  it  out, so  that  is  easier  to see  the  relationship  between  them. Here,  I  put  it  back  there to  let  you  understand that  it's  actually  there. Then  you  need  to  translate,  correct? You  need  to  translate  to  this  location. And  this  basically  is  this  d  f  here. What  is  D  f?  D  f  is  here. I  show  you  again.  In  order  to  align  x. Look  at  the  bro  one  x  or  x  i.  I  need  to translate  along  z  Along. Along  the  own  axis,  the  mobile  frame. After  that,  do  you  need  to  do  anything? No  more,  correct? No  more  translation  because I've  reached  this  location. No  more  translation,  and  I  don't  even  need to  rotate  because  X four  is  X  four  and  X  Pi  are  parallel, Z  four  and  z  five  are  also  parallel. This  explain  the  last  two. No  translation,  no  rotation. You  just  try  to imagine  two  frame  initially  coincide. How  you  move  from  one  location  to another  by  align  x  followed  by  align  z. That  will  give  you  the  four  sets of  kinematics  parameters. And  for  the  no  need  to  think, just  put  a  variable.  The  others  are  constant. Actually,  for  example,  this  0.1. This  is  0.2,  and  this  one  could  be  0.2, this  one  could  be  0.3. The  others  are  constant. But  as  I  mentioned,  usually, because  the  company  want  to make  different  models  with  different  sizes, but  same  kinematic  structures. They  will  put  something  like  d  one,  d  two, A  two  A  three  so that  they  can  just  substitute  with different  dimensions  into  it to  derive  different  kinematics  model. I  urge  everyone  to  try  to  do  it. Don't  just  read  because  this  one  required a  lot  of  practices  in  order  to  understand  it. But  basically,  you  can  see that  after  you  do  it  a  few  times, it's  actually  not  that  difficult  to  remember. All  the  z  axis  are  the  joint  xs. Except  the  last  one,  it will  be  the  approach  direction. That  means  that  physically, if  you  have  a  robot, you  want  to  model  the  four  kinematics. You  will  see  how  the  joints  are rotated  and  label  them  as  z. After  that,  you  start  to  extend  your  Z. Where  the  intercept  will  be the  origin  of  the  next  spring, x  will  be  per  penclar to  both  of  the z.  Y  comes  out naturally  from  right  hand  rules. In  some  cases,  your  z  will  not  intercept. Then  in  this  case,  do  a  common  normal. The  intersections  of  the normal  with  this  z will  be  the  origin  of  the  next  frame. Common  normal  means  perpendicular  to  both. X  will  be  along  the  common  normal, but  DH  algorithm  suggests that  point  X  away  from  the  previous  join. That  means  don't  point  backwards. Your  joint  is  here  don't  point  backwards, point  away  from  the  previous  joint. If  you  see  the  same  structures, don't  need  to  thing,  just  repeat  it. In  this  case  is  the  same  structures. In  some  cases,  when  you  try  to extend  the  z  axis, They  may  intertend  at  the  same  point. In  this  case  means  no  translation. Purely  rotation. But  if  you  draw  them together,  it's  quite  confusing. Therefore,  for  clarity  or  presentation. Let's  put  a  dash  nine there  indicating  that  the  origin  are  the same  and  extend  it out  so  that  it  is  easier  to  understand. Once  you  reach  the  efector  frame, we  call  two  frame. This  rule  doesn't  apply  anymore. We  follow  the  physical  meaning. A  sine  z  by  the  approach  direction. Approach  can  only  have  one  direction. This  backward  is  not  the  approach  direction. Sliding  direction  has  two  choices. It  can  be  this  or  this. Opening  and  closing  directions of  the  gripper. Be  two  direction.  Once  you  fix  two  of  them, the  other  one  must  follow  right  hand  rule. You  also  need  to  review  your  right  hand  rule. As  I  said,  try  to  practice  it. And  I  think  it's  time  to  take  a  break. Now  it's  805.  Okay,  please  come  back  at  8:20. I'll  see  you  later. Okay,  Class,  welcome  back. We  will  continue  on  the lectures  on  how  to  derive a  forward  kinematics  model so  that  using  that  model, given  any  joint  angles,  for  example, joint  angle  one  equal  to  all  this  angle, you  will  be  able  to  predict the  exact  position  and orientation  of  this  end  effector by  using  that  model. And  we  do  that  by  sketching  the  DH  diagrams, which  is  to  identify  all  the  joint  axis of  the  robot  systems. Here,  just  take  note  that because  this  is  obviously  a  three  D, motions  here  where  your This  is  a  moment. Something  wrong  with  the  program. This  is  the  joint  angle, where  you  can  rotate it  in  a  three  dimensional  space. Now,  when  you  sketch  the  DH  diagram, you  will  draw  it  at a  particular  configuration. For  example,  Joint  two, you  may  want  to  draw  it  at  this  angle, nothing  stop  you  from  drawing  at  this  angle. Usually,  we  draw  90  degree because  it's  easier  to  see, but  after  a  while, if  you're  familiar,  you can  even  draw  it  this  way. At  a  certain  configuration. That  means  that  you  actually draw  it  at  a  particular  configuration, namely, I'm  drawing  it,  for  example, at  a  configuration  where the  joint  angle  is  of  certain  value. In  this  case,  if  you  put  zero,  at  is  here. If  you  put  90  degree,  it  will  be  downward. If  you  put  180  degree, then  it  is  this  side,  and  so  on  and  so  forth. So  basically,  I'm  drawing  it at  a  particular  joint  configuration. Because  obviously  in  our  paper, you  cannot  draw  a  moving  robot unlike  this  animation. The  trick  is  that  when  there's  a  joint, you  can  sketch  it  as  you  wish provided  that  you  satisfied the  joint  constraint,  right? In  this  case,  just  now  we  draw  it  this  way. But  nothing  stop  you  to  draw  upwards. Later  on,  I'll  provide an  example  in  the  next  example where  he  can  draw  upward. In  fact,  the  next  one  if  you  want  to draw  upward,  it's  also  fine. But  usually,  you  may  run  out  of  space. Over  here,  you  can  see  if  you  want  to continue  outward,  it's  also  fine, or  you  may  want  to  turn  it  the  other  side, so  that  is  easier  to  see  your  diagram. Take  note  that  if  there  is  a  joint, you  can  rotate  it  in  your  DH  diagram. If  there's  a  joint,  you  can rotate  it  in  your  DH  diagram. Some  students  after  a  while, they  can  draw  it  directly on  the  original  schematic. I  means  given  a  robot  schematic, they  can  just  sketch  it  very  easily. That's  only  after  a  while where  you  have  a  better  understanding. So  at  the  first  time, when  you  look  at  this  diagram, it's  always  confusing. But  you  should  review  it,  sketch  it  yourself. So  that  you  can  get  a  better  understanding. In  the  later  week, I'll  also  release  some  exercises for  you  to  practice. But  the  examples  in the  notes  is  also  a  way  for  you  to try  to  practice  because the  answer  is  there  and you  can  watch  the  video  to see  how  it  is  sketch  up. Now,  after  you  have  assigned order  coordinates  by  DH  algorithm, you  can  now  try  to  derive the  forward  kinematics  of  the  robot  system, which  is  to  find  out  how this  two  frame  is  related  to  the  base  frame. There  are  two  things  here, one  will  be  the  rotation, one  will  be  the  translation. Robot  is  a  complex  mechanism. You  can't  find  the  relationship  between the  two  frame  and  the  base  fame  directly. In  fact,  that's  the  purpose  of  assigning all  these  coordinate  so  that you  can  find  the  relationship from  one  to  another. For  example,  if  I  find  the  transformations  of the  base  frame  and  the  first  frame. The  first  flame  with respect  to  the  base  stream, if  I  can  find  this  transformation, and  if  I  can  find this  transformation  of  the  second  frame with  respect  to  the  first  frame, then  this  will  be  the  transformations of  the  second  frame. Third  frame  with  respect  to  second  frame. This  line,  right.  Be  careful, it  means  that  they  are  together. They  are  together,  same  origin. If  you  try  to  draw  them  together, you'll  see  that  it's  extremely  confusing. That's  why  For  clarity  of  presentation, we  just  draw  it  at  a  different  location. But  the  desk  line  indicating that  the  origins  are  the  same. There's  this  transformations with  only  rotation. In  this  case,  will  be  3-4. Then  after  that  will  be  4-5. By  multiplying  all these  transformation  matrices  together. Imagine  that  you  have  all  of  them, and  if  you  multiply  them, you  get  a  composite  transformation  matrix or  five  respect  to  zero. Because  zero  is  a  base  bring. Five.  This  robot  only  have  five  joints, the  fifth  joint  will  be  the  e  factor  frame. That  is  basically  means  that  you  get the  relationship  of the  two  frame  respect  to  the  base  fringe. I'm  giving  an  overview  of what  we  going  to  learn, in  the  second  part  of  the  lectures. First  part  of  the  lectures  today, assign  the  coordinates, according  to  D  representation. Next,  we  need  to  find  out the  relationship  between each  of  the  coordinates, which  means  that  the rotation  and  the  translation  between  them. Just  now,  indeed,  I have  shown  you  that  there  are four  types  of  transformation  involved. Rotate,  rotate. The  joint  angle,  translate by  the  joint  distance, translate  along  the  link  length, and  then  rotate  by  the  link  twist  angle. This  altogether  four.  In  fact, it  explain  the  physical  meaning of  your  kinematics  parameters. Imagine  two  coordinates  initially  coincide, how  the  mobile  frame will  move  to  the  next  location. By  doing  so,  it  give  you  the  relationship  of the  mobile  frame  with respect  to  the  pay  spring. Each  of  these  two  coordinates, will  have  to  go  through four  fundamental rotate  translate  translate  rotate. One  way  is  that  you  write down  all  the  all  these  four, every  joints,  you  write  down  this  four, and  then  you  multiply  them  together, you  get  a  composite  matrix. But  imagine  every  joint, you  have  to  multiply  four  matrices  together, which  is  not  very  effective. What  people  usually do  is  that  they  will  derive a  general  transformation  matrix from  one  frame  to  another. That  means  that  instead of  finding  zero  to  one, one  to  two,  two  to  three,  three  to  four, four  to  five  by  multiplying four  matrices  in  each  transformations, we  find  a  general  one  from  k  minus  one  to  k. In  terms  of  what,  in  terms  of the  general  kinematics  parameter,  d  k, dk,  and  then  the  lin  length, and  then  ling  three  angle. Joint  angle,  any  joint  distance, any  ling  length,  any  tat  angle. From  there,  you'll  be  able  to  then  substitute some  specific  kinematics  parameters into  it  to  derive  the  particular  one. This  is  more  effective  in  the  sense  that  you multiply  these  four  matrices together.  One  time. Rotate,  translate  translate  rotate, multiply  them  together  one  time. Subsequently,  we  just substitute  the  parameters. This  is  the  idea  of  the  subsequent  lecture. Firstly,  the  first  transformation is  a  rotation  to  align  x. Remember,  you  want  to  align  x. By  rotate  with  respect  to  the  joint  axis, by  a  joint  angle. Here  I'll  show  you  the  meaning  over  here. He  where  we  have  one  joint. There's  a  joint.  That  means the  imagine  there's  a  motto  here. This  motor  will  move  the  next  link, link,  joint  k  move  link  K.  As  link  k  move, there's  an  angle  respect to  the  previous  previous  x, that  is  that  is  called  joint  angle. And  joint  angle  is  equal  to zero  when  your  link  align. You  can  see  that  when  the  link  x k  is  parallel  pointing in  the  same  direction  as  k  minus  one, The  link  angle  is joint  angle  is  equal  to  zero. When  we  sketch  it,  we  will  sketch  it at  peter  equal  to  zero, 90  degrees,  180  degrees,  270  degree,  y? Because  easier  to  see in  the  two  dimension  space, you  draw  90  degrees  is  easier  to  see. But  as  I  said,  if  you  are  familiar  enough, you  can  draw  any  configuration. As  a  beginner,  you  always  draw  90  degree, so  that  is  easier  to  differentiate  them. Now  here,  correct,  you  need  to  rotate. Rotate  this  x  axis, c  x  k  minus  one, rotate  by  by  the  joint  angle. Can  you  see  the  roe  line  moving? If  you  rotate,  respect  to the  joint  axis  by  the  joint  angle, then  you  can  see  that the  x  k  are  now  parallel. This  means  the  is  equal  to  zero. After  you  align  them. Sometimes  there  will  be a  joint  distance  This  is  a  joint  distance, that  means  that  it's  here, you  have  to  move  upward, Move  upwards  and  here  you can  see  that  there's  translations along  the  joint  axis  by  a  joint  distance. Rotate. Translate,  correct?  Two  operation. This  is  respect  to  the  joint  parameters. And  there  are  also one  link  connecting  two  joints. That  define  your  link  parameters. Basically  means  that  if you  have  a  model  here, and  in  between,  basically,  there's  a  link. The  links  angle,  as  you  can  see, is  whether  how  your  rotational  axis of  current  joint  is related  to  the  previous  prong. Respect  to  the  x  axis. Over  here,  we  can  see  that. Firstly,  I  can  translate along  the  link  length. Is  originally  here,  I translate  to  this  location. After  that,  z,  my  z  can  now be  rotated  rotated  correct? By  a  certain  angle, that  is  your  link  tree  angle, L  link  tres  angle  in order  to  reach  this  location. Basically  is  to  rotate, translate  rotate  translate  previously. After  that,  over  here, you  can  see  that  is  to  translate  and  rotate. Translate  and  rotate. Then  you'll  reach  the  target  position. That  means  that  imagine that  two  frames  initially  coincide, how  it  move  to  the  target  location. That  tells  you  the  relationship between  the  mobile  frame with  respect  to  the  fixed  frame. But  however,  you  can  see  that if  you  do  this  joint  by  joint, then  you  need  to  do  matrix multiplication  every  time,  right? This  is  not  so  effective. What  we  will  do  here  is  that  we  will  derive a  very  general  transformation  matrix from  previous  joint  to  the  next  joint. Current  joint  is  this  respect to  the  previous  join. We  derive  a  general  one so  that  we  can  refer  to  it  as  a  formula. This  will  be  the  formula  where we  will  refer  to  it for  formulating  the  transformation  matrixes based  on  the  DH  diagram. So  I'll  show  you  how  to  derive  this, even  though  it's  not  required, and  I  have  uploaded  it  in  the  NTN. If  you're  interested,  you  can  go  and  take a  look  here  or  just  show  it  to  you, how  do  we  form  this  matrix. How  to  derive  this  one? Remember  that  there  are four  operations  rotate, translate,  translate,  rotate,  correct? Rotate,  translate,  translate,  rotate. Let's  go  back  to  last  week, T  three  fundamental  rotations, one  fundamental  translations. Okay.  If  you  look  at  this  carefully, he  says  that  you're rotating  respect  to  the  z, and  translate  along  z. X  y,  z  means  123. First  axis,  second  axis, third  axis,  that  means  R  1r2r3. Rr2r3,  which  you  have  learned  last  week. If  you  look  at  this,  is rotation  about  first  axis  is  x. Rotation  about  second  axis  is Y.  Rotation  about  third  axis  is  z. If  you  rotate  about  the  first  axis, it's  very  clear,  this  will  not  change. X  will  not  change.  If  you  rotate  about  y, then  y  will  not  change. This  means  no  change.  Rotate  about  z, then  z  will  not  change. If  you  have  only  rotation, no  translation,  this  will  be  zero. If  you  have  only  translation  and  no  rotation, then  you'll  be  dy  metric. Idy  metric  means  I  multiply  by  the  vector, you'll  give  you  the  same  vector. Multiply  by  a  matrix, you'll  give  you  the  same  matrix, means  no  change. Idity  means  no  change. In  here,  we  can  then  apply  to this  four fundamental  rotation  and  translations. Because  it  is  respect  to the  mobile  frame,  mobile  frame. Here  you  put  an  dy  metric  first. Means  what  initially  coincide. They  are  initially  together. Then  the  first  operation  is  rotate. You  do  a  post  multiplication because  it  respect  to  the  mobile  fringe. Rotate  about  the  z  axis. Z  axis  is  third  axis  by  the  joint  angle. Then  translate  about  the  z  axis. By  the  way,  this  notation  I,  it  means  001. Is  a  unit  vector  along  the  z  direction. It  is  rotating  about  the  z  axis, and  then  translate  along the  z  axis  by  dk.  Rotate  translate. After  that,  you  change  to  what  x, x  is  first  axis. Here  you  have  I  one.  I  one means  one,  zero,  zero. This  is  first  axis. I  translate  along  x  axis, first  axis  by  the  link  length  and  is  rotate with  respect  to  the  first  axis by  link  to  angle,  right? Altogether  four.  As  I  said, it  make  no  sense  to  multiply this  four  in  heavy  joints. What  people  do  is  that they  will  find  out  the  general  one. This  is  the  general  one.  Firstly,  rotate about  third  axis  means  what  z. You  put  r  three  here. R  three.  In  the  homogeneous  coordinates. On  rotation.  After  that,  is  a  translation. Translate  along  the  x  axis. Xx  x  axis  is  first  axis,  i  three. Let's  look  at  it  again,  z. These  three  are  the  z  is  the  third  axis. This  is  respect  to  the  z, and  this  is  respect  to  the  z. On  z,  that  means  that  x  equal  to  zero, and  there's  no  rotation,  only  translation. We  have  model  the  rotations  and  translations, which  is  relating  to  the  joint  parabaors. The  next  operation  is  the  translation. Now  it  is  x, there's  only  translation,  no  rotation. Therefore,  the  rotation  is  identity  matrics, and  the  translation  is only  along  the  x  axis,  not  y  not  z. We  only  put  this  translate along  the  lin  length. No  translation  along  y  and  z. This  is  how  we  represent the  translation  along  the  x  axis. Finally,  is  the  rotation, respect  to  x,  respect  to  x  means  r  one. R  one,  and  there's  no  translation, which  means  that  we  can write  down  the  four  matrices, which  is  how  your mobile  frame  initially  coincide. After  a  series  of transformation  will reach  the  target  position, which  is  assigned  by  DH  diagram. Here,  basically, you  just  multiply  in  this  order, pose  multiply,  post  multiply,  post  multiply, or  not  go  into  this, but  if  you  multiply them  together  and  simplifying  it, you  can  get  this  matrix. You  can  go  back  and  try. If  you  can't  derive  it  nowadays, the  last  language  model  is  very  powerful. You  can  just  cut  and  paste my  slide  and  say  that  show  me, how  to  derive  this  in  details. But  you  if  you're  interested, you  can  try  to  derive  it, but  you're  not  expected to  derive  this,  right? But  here,  I  just  show  it  to  you  how  it  was derived  so  that  you will  not  be  confused.  Why. You  have  this  one.  In  fact, you  read  all  the  textbook,  they will  just  provide  you  this. You  should  try  to  derive  it. Secondly,  you're  not  expected to  memorize  this  also. Some  students  are  quite  amazing  they can  memorize  this  exactly. But  it's  meaningless. If  you  memorize  this, it's  quite meaningless  because  there's  no  meaning. You  just  memorize  something in  a  fixed  pattern. We  don't  expect  you  to  memorize  it. If  it's  needed,  you  will  be  provided. As  an  engineer.  If  you  need  it, you  refer  to  the  textbook. Refer  to  text  books  to look  at  this  and  see  how  we  will  use  it. Here,  we  will  just  use  it. But  it  was  derived  based  on the  physical  meanings  of the  kinematics  parameters. It  tells  you  how  the  coordinates are  related  to  one  another  in  a  general  way. How  the  current  coordinate  is  related  to  the previous  one  by the  four  sets  of  kinematics  parameters, D  the  K,  Dk, and  then  the  A  K  K. Joint  angle,  joint  distance, link  length,  link  twist  angle. Later  on,  suppose  that you  need  some  particular  configuration. Maybe  this  is  equal  to  0.2, is  equal  to  0.3,  is  equal  to  zero, for  example,  you  just  pluck it  into  this  general  one. Then  you  can  easily  get  the  particular  one. This  is  the  idea  that  we  going  to  do. Now,  inverse,  usually  you  don't  need  it. But  this  is  again, just  for  your  info,  if  you want  to  find  the  inverse, refer  back  to  page  51  last  lectures, where  basically  you  need  to partition  it  into  this  form. Then  if  you  take  the  transpose  of  this, you'll  see  that  this  is  this  transpose. Remember  transpose  will  be  the  inverse, correct? Rotational  matrix. As  for  the  other  one, This  is  your  P.  Here, this  is  actually  negative  RTP. Be  it's  rotated. Therefore,  you  need  to  invert it  and  translate  it  back. Then  you'll  get  this.  This  is just  for  your  info. The  next  one  is  for  joint  type. So  far,  I  have  only show  you  all  revalue  joint. A  revenue  joints. But  in  some  robots, you  may  have  mixed  join  type, that  means  some  prismatic joints  on  revenue  joint. So  suppose  that  you  have  revenue  joints, then  your  joint  distance  is  the  variable. Translation  is  the  variable. Then  your  theter  will  become  a  constant, would  become  a  constant. That's  one  problem  here because  if  you  use  the  notations, then  there  will  be  a  confusion. W  one  is  constant,  which  one is  Joint  variable. For  example,  if  I  put  two, two  joint,  D  one,  D  one, A  one,  Alpha  one, D  two,  d  two, A  two,  Alpha  two. But  first  one  is  revalue  joint. Second  one  is  prismatic  joint. At  one  grant,  if  you  look  at  this, you  can't  tell  which  is,  which  is  prismatic. This  cause  some  confusion and  in  all  this  kinematics  modeling. Usually  what  we  do  is  we define  something  called  Q. Don't  need  to  worry  about  all  this. It  just  means  that  if  this  is  revalue  join, then  don't  put  dt  one  put  Q  one. If  this  is  prismatic  joint, then  don't  put  D  two  put  two. Then  it  is  very  clear  that Q  two  are  variable. The  others  will  be  constant. This  is  just  more  mathematical  way to  say  what  I  have  just  mentioned. This  is  for  mixed  joint  types  sometimes, and  even  for  the  same  joint  type, you  can  also  replace  b  two  means  d1t2. Some  of  them  could be  prismatic  joint,  correct? It  depends  on  your  DH  diagram. As  I  mentioned  just  now, you  can  use  the  general  one to  obtain  some  particular  one, one,  zero  to  11  to  two all  the  way  until  you reach  the  end  effector  frame. Then  you  multiply  them  together, that  will  give  you the  composite  transformation  matrix to  give  you  the  kinematics  model. Sometimes,  it  may  be  useful, not  necessary,  but  sometimes if  you  want,  you  partition  it. According  to  what  first  three. First  three  is  the  major  axis. You  form  the  position  X  Y  Z. The  remaining  one  is  called  minor  axis, I  establishes  the  orientation. Okay.  In  any  case, you  multiply  them  together,  correct? This  one  means  that you  multiply  the  first  three first  and  you  multiply  the  remaining  one. For  example,  in  the  previous  example, the  first  three  will  be  this  zero  to  one, one  to  two,  and  then  two  to  three. This  will  be  this. Minor  will  be  just  this  one, three  to  four,  and  then  four  to  five. That  means  that  you  do  not  have full  degree  of  freedom. Your  robot  will  not be  able  to  perform  some  tasks. After  multiplying  everything  together, that  means  zero  to  one, one  to  two,  two  to  three, three  to  four,  four  to  five, for  example,  you  get  5-0. That  is  the  composite. Csomation  matrix. What  does  it  represent? You  basically  represent  how your  fifth  frame  is  related  to  the  base  fr. Because  it's  in  the  homogeneous  coordinates, include  the  translation  information and  the  rotational  information. As  functions  of  the  join  angle. That  given  joiner  one,  joiner  two,  three, four  and  five,  we  can calculate  the  translations  of the  n  factor  frame with  respect  to  the  base  frame. That  is  what  the  positions  of the  nu  factor,  correct? Position  of  the  factor. And  from  the  rotational  matrix, we  can  also  calculate  the  orientations  of the  factor  respect  to the  base  frame.  So  take  note. This  is  your  reference. We  want  to  see  where  is  the  position  now, with  respect  to  the  reference  along  x  y  z. Whereas  the  x  position  where  is the  y  position  wears  the  z  positions, and  we  want  to  predict  it  by the  kinematics  model  so that  given  all  the  joiner, I  can  use  that  model  to instantly  tell  me  where  is  this  position. I  can  also  use  this  model to  calcate  the  orientation. This  is  the  overview, and  then  we  can multiply  them  together  to get  this  single  transformation  matrix. After  you  get  this  transformation  matrix, is  four  by  four, four  by  four  because  this  is  for  rotation, and  this  is  for  translation and  you  complete  the  square. By  appending  the  last  row  of  the  IDD  matrix. But  once  you  get  the  final  matrix, you  should  partition  into  this  form. And  then  this  will  be  your  translation. This  will  be  your  rotation. It  tells  you  what  the  position and  orientations  of the  e  factor  frame with  respect  to  the  base  frame, and  if  you  have substituted  the  joint  variable  into  it, you'll  give  you  a  general  model. General  model,  that  means  here, you  can  see  this  variable, variable,  Qn  variable. Very  often  I  see  some students  just  put  Q  one  equal to  zero  because  you sketch  a  Q  one  equal  to  zero, but  you  should  not  put  equal  to  zero. Otherwise,  you're  not  modeling the  po  kinematics  model. You're  modeling  the  position at  this  configuration  which  you  sketch. You  get  the  different. You  should  put  in  the  variable. That's  why  in  the  kinematics  table, you  always  see  that  all  the  joint  variables would  not  be  constant  value. Okay.  After  you  get  this  metric,  correct? You  partition  into  this  form. As  I  said,  you  give  you  the  physical  meaning. Let  me  show  it  to  you  over  here. This  one  is  very  easy  to  understand. P  is  this  one. The  translations  is the  positions  of  the  endvtor. Now,  the  next  one  is  a  three  times  matrix, three  times  stre  matrix. Three  matrix  is  this. This  is  r  one,  vector  one, and  this  is  R  two,  and  this  is. That  means  that  you  can  actually partition  the  three  matri  into. Three  columns.  Each  of this  column  has  a  physical  meaning as  indicated  in  this  diagram. In  fact,  you  can  see  that  this  is  r  one, r  two,  r  three. In  particular,  what  is  r  three? R  three  is  the  third  columns  of your  rotational  transformation  matrix, and  the  third  columns  of your  rotation  transformation  matrix is  the  z  axis,  correct? X,  x  yz123,  zs. Z  axis  was  assigned  as the  approach  vector,  DH  algorithm. Approach  vector,  assigned  as  z. Which  one  is  y,  y,  sliding  direction, correct?  Sliding  direction. So  you  can  see  that  the  second  column will  be  the  sliding  direction. Finally,  the  x  axis, will  be  the  R. Means  that  when  you obtain  the  rotation  transformation, actually,  this  is  your  x  n. This  is  a  y  n.  This  is  a  z  n, and  this  is  approach.  This  is  sliding. This  is  normal. There's  a  certain  physical  meaning  to  it. Sorry,  my  handwriting  is  very  bad. If  you  don't  quite understand  it,  just  do  it  this  way. For  example,  r  one. Maybe  I  just  focus  on  r  one. Say  I'll  put  here  r11,  r21,  rr31. Now,  I  say  that  this  is  x. Why  is  it  so?  Suppose  that you  are  here  at  the  mobile  frame. Imagine  you  are  sitting  at  the  mobile  frame. You  look  at  x,  x  will  be one,  one,  zero,  zero. Correct?  Let's  call  it the  rest,  whatever  value  here. You  can  see  that  when  you multiply  this  by  this, you  get  a  first  column.  Correct? This  means  that  you  are  at  the  mobile  frame, sitting  at  the  mobile  frame, you  are  looking  at  the  x  axis, the  tip  of  the  x  axis, which  is  this  one. Sitting  here.  Looking  at this  is  always  one,  zero,  zero. But  someone  at  the  fixed  frame. Assuming  that  there's  no  translation. Here,  I'm  only  looking  at  rotation. Only  rotation. Assuming  there's  no  translation. Someone  looking  at  that  tip, he  will  be  this  vector, which  is  the  first  column  of your  rotation  and  transformation  matrix. The  reason  is  clear. The  rotation  multiplied  by the  fix  multiplied  by  the  mobile, you  get  the  position  with  respect  to  the  fix. That  means  how  this  vector  is oriented  with  respect  to  the  fixed  spring. That  is  a  three  dimensional  vector. Similarly,  if  we  multiply  by  zero,  one, zero,  which  is  y. You  get  the  second  column. If  you  multiply  by  001, you  get  the  third  column. In  short,  it  means  what  this  is r  one  and  r  two, r  three,  x  y  and  z,  x  y  and  z. How  is  this  pointed respect  to  the  base  string. How  x  y  z  of  your  end  eftor  is pointed  respect  to  your  base  string. From  here,  you  can  get  the  approach  diction. From  the  third  column  of your  rotational  transformation  matrix,  right? Then  you  can  command  the  robot to  point  in  a  certain  direction. And  you  can  get  the  sliding  direction  here  to align  your  grapple  with a  flat  surface  of the  object,  so  as  to  grab  it. Here,  all  these  allow you  to  command  the  robots  now, not  only  to  move  to  a  position, but  to  orientate, your  gripper  pointing  at  a  certain  direction, and  also  rotate  your  gripper. As  to  align  with  the  flat surface,  here  For  example, I  show  example,  I  want  to  pick  up  this  part, then  I  should  approach  here. Maybe  I  should  align my  gripper  with  this  surface  or  this  surface, depending  on  how  you  want  to  pick  it  up. That  means  that  you  align the  approach  vertically  downward, and  you  align  your  gripper with  the  flat  surface. Then  you  grab  it,  right? So  from  the  kinematics  models, we  can  predict  all  this. Maybe  we  just  look  at  one  more  example. Example  2.11  is  actually the  same  examples  that  we have  derived  the  four  sets of  kinematics  parameter  just  now. This  is  just  some  particular  examples where  we  will  substitute the  kinematics  parameters that  we  have  derived  in 2.10  into  this  general  transformation  matrix. Substitute  this  into the  general  transformation  matrix to  derive the  particular  transformation  matrix. This  is  just  substitution. I'll  just  go  through  very  quickly. Now,  put  Joint  one first,  starting  from  joint  one. Joint  one  means  what. I  want  to  find  out  what's the  relationship  from  the  base  frame to  the  first  frame. To  the  first  frame.  If  you refer  to  this  example, that  means  that  just  put  k  equal to  one  into  it. K  equal  to  one,  you  get  one,  respect  to  zero. Here  you  get  cosine  d  one, sine  d  one,  Cosine  d  one,  sine  d  one. Next,  this  is your  joint  distance  one,  Only  here. Follow  by  link  length one  and  link  to  its  angle.  One. This  is  for  joint  one. Then  you  check  the  table  again. Theta  one  is  a  variable because  this  is  your  revalue  joint. Now,  here  you  can  see  that if  you  don't  put  D  one, maybe  some  of  you  forgot  zero because  you  draw  at  one  equal  to  zero. Then  subsequently,  you  will  not have  a  variable  inside your  transformation  matrix. You  have  some  constant  value. And  the  objective  of kinematic  modeling  is  that  given  any  the  one, you're  going  to  find the  position  and  orientation, not  given  the  one  equal  to  zero, given  any  theta  one. This  one  must  be  a  variable. Just  leave  it  there. There's  only  one  variable, the  others  will  be  constant. But  this  D  one,  we  put  it  general  here because  sometimes  D  one  maybe  ten  CM. Another  model  will  be  20  CM. Another  model  will  be  50  CM. Same  structures, different  sizes,  different  dimensions. You  just  leave  it  as  D  one. But  take  note  that  it's  not  a  variable. It's  a  constant.  For  this  model  is  20, for  the  other  model  is  constant. Then  D  one  is  a  constant.  Here. If  you  want  a  particular  one  just  put maybe  0.2  meter  or  20  CM,  put  it  there. After  that,  we  take note  that  A  one  is  equal  to  zero. A  one  is  equal  to  zero, which  means  what  these  two  will be  equal  to  zero. Finally,  Alpha  one  is  negative  Pi  over  two, that  means  negative  90  degree. By  the  way,  I've  uploaded  this  slide  in the  Tn  you  can  refer  to  it. I'm  just  teaching  you  one  example. So  that  go  back, you  can  try  out  for  the  rest. Alpha  one  is  negative  90  degree. Over  here,  it  means  what Cine  negative  90  is  zero,  press  calculator. Sine  negative  90  is  equal to  negative  one,  just  press  calculator. Basically  means  that  if  you  see cosine  Alpha  one,  you'll  become  zero. I  will  become  zero.  If  you see  sine  Alpha  one, replace  sine  Alpha  one  by  negative  one. The  top  will  become  negative and  the  bottom  one because  there's  a  negative  here, so  it  become  positive. That  means  that  you  can see,  I'm  just  substituting the  substituting the  particular  climatic  parameters into  the  general  one. Rather  than  doing  four  transformations, multiplication  per  joint. That  means  you  rotate,  translate,  translate, and  rotate  for  to  get  01. Then  you  do  another  time,  rotate,  translate, translate,  rotate,  for  the  next  one. It's  not  effective  to  keep  doing that  repeatedly  for  each  joint. What  happened  was  that  we derive  a  general  one? Then  substitute  the  particular  one  into it  to  get  each  types  of  transformation. We  get  the  transformation  matrix from  base  bring  to  the  first  bring. Similarly,  you  can  do  it for  the  others.  This  is  the  first  one. Followed  by  the  second  one. Second  one,  you  put  k  equal  to two  into  the  general  one. That  means  that  this  is  k minus  one  to  k.  You  put k  equal  to  two,  you  get  one  to  two. Then  you  substitute  all these  parameters  into  it, it  means  what  D  two  is the  general  joint  angle. D  two  is  equal  to  zero. Alpha  two  is  a  family  of  robots, different  dimensions,  and  Alpha  two. A  two  is  this  different  dimension. Alpha  two  is  equal  to  zero. This  is  the  second  one  and  the  third  one. If  you  compare  the  second  and  third, they  are  similar.  Similar. Don't  waste  your  time.  Just  do  one. Then  you  can  similarly  derive  the  other  one. Consign  two  becomes  sine  d  two. Then  A  two  become  A  three. The  rest  will  be  the  same, zero  and  one  will  be  the  same. It  is  maybe  sometime  good to  partition  the  multiplication. That  means  that  you  multiply the  first  three  joints. That  is  the  whist  respect  to  base. The  major  axis.  Suppose  that  you  multiply these  three  matrices  together and  simplify  it  using  trigmr. You  can  check  that  it  reduces  to this  single  composite  transformation  matrix. This  matrix  actually  tells you  the  position  and orientation  of  the  wit  respect  to  the  base. Up  to  the  ist. The  final  one  left  only  two  because this  robot  has  one  degree  of  freedom  less. Six  is  complete,  but  less  than  that, then  you  basically cannot  achieve  some  orientation. But  certain  application  is  okay. Finally,  you  put  k  go  to  four  k  to  five, you  get  three  to  four,  four  to five.  You  can  go  back  to  try. The  substitute  into this  general  transformation  metrics to  see  whether  you  can  get  this particular  one  and the  minor  axis  will  be  the  last  two. Again,  here  we  partition  the  multiplication. You  multiply  this  three  together. That  is  the  major  one.  Then  you multiply  this  two  together. That  is  the  minor,  after multiplying  the  minor  axis  together, this  is  a  f  respect  to  three, that  means  the  transformations of  the  any  factor  frame  respect  to  the  with. Lastly,  we  will  multiply the  major  axis  and  the  minor  axis. This  is  the  minor.  Previously,  we have  obtained  the  major  axis. You  just  multiply this  matrix  with  this  matrix. You  will  be  able  to  get  this  matrix. Get  this  matrix.  Of  course, after  some  simplification, careful  simplifications. Nowadays  with  graphic  tools and  also  last  learning  age  model, actually,  all  these  can  be performed  quite  easily. But  at  this  learning  stage, you  should  learn  how  to  multiply them  manually. This  show  you  the  overview. We  basically  derive a  general  transformation  matrix and  use  it  to  derive the  individual  transformation  matrix, zero  to  one,  one  to  two, two  to  three,  three  to  four,  four  to  five. Then  we  multiply  them  together  to get  a  single  transformation  matrix of  the  two  frame  with respect  to  the  base  frame. Sometime  you  partition  the  multiplication. Right?  Major  and  min,  but  not  necessary. You  can  just  multiply  them straight.  No  problem. Unless  there's  a  specific  purpose  that  you may  want  to  change  the  minor  axis,  correct? It  makes  sense  that  you partition  it  into  here. So  that  if  another  rub  you  want  to  put full  three  degree  of  freedom  for  orientation, then  you  just  model  that  one, multiply  with  the  same  matrix for  the  major  axis,  right? Because  maybe  the  company decided  to  have  five  degree of  freedom,  six  degree  of  freedom. Then  you  just  change the  last  transformation  matrix. This  will  say  some  time.  And  finally, suppose  that  you  derive  the general  one  and  suppose  that one  particular  model  at this  dimension  given  here, Then  you  just  plug  it  into your  general  transformation  matrix, and  that  will  give  you a  particular  transformation  matrix, which  is  four  by  four. After  you  get  this  matrix, you  should  partition  it  into  this  form. And  it  has  the  physical  meaning saying  that  this  is the  positions  of  your  NE  factor  respect to  the  base  frame  as  functions  of  d  one, d  two,  d  three,  d4d5. That  given  the  joint  angles, you  can  calculate  the  position  now. By  the  way,  in  this  notes, if  you  see  C  two,  it  means  sine  d  two. If  you  see  c234  or  c23. It  means  what  sine  d  two  plus  d  three. S234  is sine  two  plus  three  plus  d  four. All  these  are  defined  here. This  is  a  short  form  because  otherwise, the  equations  will  be  quite  long. Over  here,  you  can  see  that  this  is  x. This  is  y.  This  is. Where  are  the  x  y  z  here? Based  ring,  x,  y,  and  z. The  functions  of  the  joint  angles, which  means  that  for  example, given  some  of  the  joint  angles, you  can  calculate  the  x  position. First  one.  Given  the  joint  angles, you  can  calculate  the  y  position. Given  the  joint  angles,  I  can  also calculate  the  z  position, which  is,  that  means  that  at a  certain  joint  angle, what  will  be  the  x  position? What  will  be  the  y  position, and  what  will  be  the  z  position? All  this  can  be  predicted through  all  this  kinematics  modeling. Next,  orientation. Once  you  get  the  rotational  transformation, now  I  show  it  to  you,  it  can  be partitioned  into  this  form,  correct? Partition  into  this  form. And  the  first  one  is  actually, second  one  is,  third  one  is  z. Z  will  be  this  approach  vector. Y  would  be  a  sliding  vector. X  is  the  normal  direction. That  means  that  you  retrieve  this  vector. I  give  you  the  directions of  your  approach  vector. Given  some  of  the  angles, you  can  calculate  where  is  it pointing?  Where  is  it  approaching? Then  given  some  of  the  angles, you  can  also  use  it  to  calculate W  is  the  sliding? Grier.  Where  is  your  gripper aligning  in  what  direction  now? The  normal  vector  usually  is redundant.  Correct? Because  if  you  want  to  grab  something, you  just  approach  and  align the  sliding  directions,  correct? Approach,  rotate your  sliding  direction,  then  you  can  grab. Some  of  the  informations are  actually  redundant. These  three  vectors  actually  is  sufficient, right  to  command  the  robots. Okay.  I  also  upload  this  summary. Next  week,  we'll  go  through it  in  a  complete  picture. Just  to  go  through  the  step and  then  you  have  a  better  understanding. So  please  go  back  to  review  it. So  the  next  week  when  I  go  through  again, right,  you'll  be  able to  understand  it  better. Okay.  I'll  stop  here  today and  see  you  next  week.  Thank  you. We'll  see  you  next  week.
